Kosovo's privatisation process is under scrutiny
Kosovo is taking a hard look at its privatisation process in light of recurring complaints.
By Muhamet Brajshori for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 21/03/12
Feronikel was privatised five years ago, and is still in business, but operates amid concerns for workers’ safety. [Reuters]
On paper at least, it looks like a great idea.
The government sells a business, gets out from under the yoke of management, and money from the sale helps to fund the state budget.
But in Kosovo, critics say the legal process involved with privatisation is both complex and politically charged, which will have a long-term impact on the economy.
They say some owners or employees can take advantage of specific loopholes while others get almost nothing.
There is also an ethnic component, since individuals from various communities can say that discrimination -- either ongoing or previous -- affected their ability to benefit from privatisation.
Esat Berisha is one such example.
"My father worked at Hidroteknika, [as did] I until December 1990, but then I was removed because Serbian authorities removed us.
And after the war I hoped to get back to my job, but it never happened."
After Hidroteknika was privatised in 2006, "I never got any compensation, and the worst is that the company does not exist anymore, because the new owner has changed the destiny of it," Berisha told SETimes.
In some cases, companies were bought more for the land than for any desire to keep operating them.
He is not alone: discriminatory legislation imposed by the Milosevic regime forced thousands in Kosovo to leave their jobs.
Beyond that, many companies that have been privatised have changed work locations, and very often employees, like Berisha, are shed from payrolls, prompting frequent protests in front of the Privatisation Agency.
Dardan Sejdiu, an economy expert from the Vetvendosje Movement, is a vocal critic.
"A decade later, we see that the economy is terribly unstructured.
Most manufacturing companies no longer exist or are used for storage of goods; efficiency as a concept seems were only words and unemployment is deepening.
And ultimately the number of foreign investors has been symbolic, and the amount invested by them was symbolic," Sejdiu told SETimes.
More than 600m euros that were transferred to banks abroad and unused by Kosovo's government are the result of the privatisation of public and state-owned companies in recent years.
Sejdiu says it's too little, that some countries in the region have sold just one or a few companies for that amount.
Seb Bytyci, executive director of Balkan Policy Institute, agrees.
"The main shortcomings are selling for lower prices, as the value [of the companies] decreased due to mismanagement, dysfunction of enterprises, and corruption charges," he told SETimes.
There is also the cost of opportunity lost: "In some cases, privatisation may have led to better services and efficiency."
Sejdiu says that, in hindsight, the process "was hastily done … without a plan for economic development" and that privatisation has led to major problems for workers.
He cites companies in the eastern Ana Morava region, where there were formerly "closed to 17,000 workers in enterprises which are now privatized.
Today these enterprises employ [less than] 1,700 of them -- not even 10% of the workforce was maintained," Sejdiu argued.
Bytyci says strong workers' unions would have lead to better outcomes.
"Here the main problem is lack of true unions.
Workers were not able to negotiate a deal that provides an easier transition.
So many workers are dismissed.
As for those who continue to work, [there is no] guarantee for their safety at work.
Ferronikeli is a flagrant case where a lack of political will to fix the issue of job security threatens workers' lives," he told SETimes.
In the recent months, several workers at the Feronikel company in central Kosovo have been injured, forcing Parliament Speaker Jakup Krasniqi to call for better and safer working conditions.
Feronikel was privatised in 2007.
Media mogul's sentence renews debate in Macedonia
Some allege the verdict of Velija Ramkovski is an attack on media freedom, but others claim the evidence of his crimes proves otherwise.
By Klaudija Lutovska for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 21/03/12
Media mogul Velija Ramkovski was sentenced to 13 years in prison for tax evasion and money laundering. [Tomislav Georgiev/SETimes]
A criminal verdict and prison sentence against media mogul Velija Ramkovski, a frequent critic of the Macedonian government, threatens to have a chilling effect on the press, according to journalists in the small Balkan nation.
Ramkovski, former owner of the A1 television station, four newspapers and other enterprises, was sentenced in Skopje criminal court on March 14th to 13 years in prison for money laundering, criminal conspiracy, abuse of position and tax evasion; 19 accomplices received prison terms of two to seven years.
A1 TV and four newspapers were closed for failing to pay taxes and fulfill obligations to creditors.
"The impression is that the actions undertaken towards these media, for which the verdicts were given, are selective and the institutions do not use the same methods in applying the laws towards all media," Macedonia Media Institute director Biljana Petkovska told SETimes.
Some journalists, particularly former A1 TV employees, maintain that case, nicknamed "Cobweb," represents a fight between the government and the then most powerful TV station in Macedonia that was critical of its policies and in support of the opposition.
"The current political establishment is going to put under absolute control every free thought and every opinion that is against it.
Its goal, and today that is proven, was to quiet A1 TV and Velija Ramkovski as carriers of the struggle against the dictatorship of [Prime Minister] Nikola Gruevski," former A1 TV editor and opposition Sandzak League MP Safet Bishevac said.
Officials responded that A1 TV has been treated the same as any other organisation, Ramkovski was guilty of years of criminal activity.
"This is an uncompromising fight against crime and corruption that exist in all countries, but whose sanction depends mostly on the political will of relevant factors and the ability and capacity of institutions to independently perform their work," ruling VMRO MP Antono Milososki told SETimes.
Prosecutors supplied 25 witnesses who testified that Ramkovski evaded paying 4.5m euros in taxes and gained 17.5m euros through frauddulant means -- such as by issuing bills with false content.
Ramkovski operated through his 15 firms -- also active in Turkey and the US -- which he headquartered at the A1 TV address.
According to Transparency International Macedonia's section President Sladjana Taseva, the concern is more about the government freezing and confiscating A1 TV's assets.
Taseva said Transparency has filed a petition with Macedonia's Constitutional Court to examine the legality of the seizure.
"I am convinced Cobweb will have its epilogue in international courts," Taseva said.
Others, like veteran journalist Mirka Velinovska, argued there are no arguments to substantiate the complaints regarding media freedom.
"Do you want the law to be upheld or not?
Freedom of speech in Macedonia is alive and well and the A1 TV journalists who lost their jobs are working again in the profession.
Some ... received funds from foreign supporters and opened their own media; others are employed in domestic media.
Where here is freedom of speech challenged?" Velinovska told SETimes.
BiH's Komsic resigns from his party
BiH presidency member Zeljko Komsic has turned his back on the ruling Social Democratic Party, shaking the political scene in the country.
By Bedrana Kaletovic for Southeast European Times in Tuzla -- 21/03/12
Zeljko Komsic will continue in his post as a BiH tripartite presidency member. [Reuters]
Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) presidency member Zeljko Komsic resigned from his post as Social Democratic Party (SDP) vice president and longtime member of the party's senior leadership on Tuesday (March 20th).
Komsic, the Croatian member of the tripartite presidency, is one of the most popular politicians in the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
"I remain a member of the [BiH] presidency and I will continue in this position to work at full capacity with all obligations to the state," Komsic told the media after announcing his resignation from the party.
Although there has been no reaction from SDP, many speculate that Komsic's abrupt move stems from his falling out with party President Zlatko Lagumdzija, who supported Serbian Foreign Minister Vuk Jeremic's candidacy for UN secretary-general.
The SDP president's visit to Belgrade last week was the culmination of the disagreement, as Lagumdzija ignored the opposition to his support for Jeremic from Komsic and party members and supporters.
"It is good to reach consensus and have the name of one candidate.
We need ... give a support to Jeremic.
Otherwise we would be frivolous politicians with no common position," Lagumdzija told reporters in Belgrade after a meeting with Jeremic on March 14th.
The SDP became the strongest party on the political scene in BiH in the last general elections in 2010.
Ironically, the results of that election were the centre of the party's tension.
Many party members felt that Lagumdzija's decision to form a coalition with the Party of Democratic Action (SDA) was autocratic -- and was considered a betrayal by most of the party cadres and citizens who supported the SDP in the elections.
"Lagumdzija and Komsic have ruined the SDP by turning it into a hostage of personal political desires.
Their conflict is only an indication of irresponsibility by the state," professor at Philosophy Faculty in Sarajevo Enver Kazaz told SETimes.
Conflicts have long been present in the SDP.
Many prominent members have left the party.
"The party forgets the principles of social democracy.
This is its fundamental principle, and these events in the party are the price of that act," former SDP member Senad Pecanac told SETimes.
Sulejman Tihic, a leader of the SDA, said he believes that the Komsic's resignation could influence the country's foreign policy.
"This can complicate the functioning of the BiH presidency and the ministry of foreign affairs with regard to the fact that Komsic, together with other members of the presidency, are in charge of foreign policy," Tihic told SETimes.
Just months before the October local elections, the resignation has shaken voters, and puts the SDP in a difficult position in light of Komsic's popularity.
"He never favored one nation. He fought for the country, for BiH.
Because of that I was motivated to vote for him," Selma Gunic of Sarajevo told SETimes.
"This country needs politicians like Komsic.
If a party has betrayed his views the logical step is to leave it.
These moves are reason for more intensely supporting him," Tulza resident Ivica Tomic told SETimes.
Moldova's new president to focus on reform, integration
After almost three years with no leader, Moldova now has a new president.
By Alina Radu for Southeast European Times in Chisinau -- 21/03/12
Moldova's new president, Nicolae Timofti, is the country's first leader in almost three years. [Reuters]
Moldova's new president, 64-year-old former judge Nicolae Timofti, has promised to lead the country on the European accession path.
But he must overcome several challenges in order to do so.
Timofti assumes the post after a narrow vote last week.
The country has been without a leader for almost three years.
"One of the most important state institutions is paralised.
The vital process of country development have been affected by the instablity and uncertainty," Timofti told parliament on Monday (March 19th) as the lawmakers validated the March 16th election.
Topping his agenda will be to solve the political deadlock.
Many debates have concluded that the constitution has to be changed, allowing the next president to be elected by the citizens, not the politically divided parliament.
"We have to recognize that the constitutional reform that started in 2000 is not finished.
Today we confront more severe problems that affect not only state institutions, but also fundamental human rights," Timofti told lawmakers.
Constitutional expert and MP Victor Popa said that one of Timofti’s first goals should be constitutional reform and improvement.
"I think it is his obligation to co-operate with the parliament on constitutional reform.
Of course it is a long and a complicated procedure, but the new president should ensure that the constitution works for all citizens," Popa told SETimes.
The parliament has tried seven times to elect a leader, but failed each time to present a candidate to garner the majority of votes.
The deadlock stems from the fact that the Aliance for European Integration -- which has the majority of the votes in the parliament -- is short by two votes, while representatives of the Communist Party refused to vote for an alliance candidate.
In November 2011, several members of the Communists left the party to create a Socialist faction in the parliament.
In the March 16th election, they joined the pro-European majority.
The new president has said EU accession will be a priority.
"We need an idea to reunite society, to make it move forward as a whole.
And I believe that this is the idea of the European integration.
People should understand that the EU is a space of values and welfare and they deserve to be a part of it -- but we have to make certain efforts as well," Timofti said during the elections.
One of those efforts, Justice Minister Oleg Efrim said, is judicial reform.
"We are at the begining of justice reform in Moldova, and the contribution of the new president is just a must.
He is doomed to offer us all his knowledge and expertise for justice for human rights," Efrim told SETimes.
Timofti agreed.
"An independent judicial system is the key in the country's development.
From this grows investments, places to work, entrepreneurship development, combating the poverty efforts and the trust of Moldovan citizens in the state and the future," he said.
Although citizens differ in their opinions on whether the new leader will solve the country's problems, many agree that things are worse without a president.
"Moldova has not had a president for so long.
It is like a house without a manager.
The country cannot develop without a president; nobody believes in the future," Veronica Popescu, a teacher from Calarasi, told SETimes.
"We don't have places to work, we have to leave [the country] every year [to find work] because here we don't have a job market.
Will the president solve this problem?
I don't think so, but a president means more political stability in the country," 52-year-old citizen Gheorge Tataru told SETimes.
"I was in the school on the day of elections -- we have a big TV screen in the hall.
All the teachers and pupils were watching and listening [to the vote].
For me, it seems to be important.
Since I was born, I had only one communist president -- this is first pro-European president in my life," 11-year-old student Inga Taranu told SETimes.
Branko Crvenkovski: Macedonia has fulfilled the NATO criteria
NATO membership for Albania, Croatia and Macedonia will contribute greatly to further stabilising the Western Balkans, says Macedonian President Branko Crvenkovski in an exclusive interview for Southeast European Times.
By Marina Stojanovska for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 17/03/08
Macedonian President Branko Crvenkovski.
Southeast European Times: Mr. President, do you expect a turbulent period for the region after Kosovo’s independence?
Branko Crvenkovski: The declaration of Kosovo's independence undoubtedly poses some risks.
The fact that neither Serbia nor the Serbian population in Kosovo as well as a number of countries throughout the world agree with such an act speaks of a period of serious challenges we are facing.
In my opinion, the key issue is in the way things will move in the northern part of Kosovo, where the majority Serbian population lives.
If an effective presence of international structures and the new Kosovo authorities is not established in that part we could likely bear witness to a so called "soft division" of Kosovo, which could be a constant generator of instability within Kosovo itself as well as an encouragement for new ethnic distinctions in the region.
Setimes: How could independence affect Macedonia and its relations with Serbia?
Do you expect economic or other sorts of blockades?
Crvenkovski: The Republic of Macedonia has not defined its final relation to Kosovo's independence yet.
We are still holding to our position that as a candidate for the EU and NATO membership we will follow the common policy of these structures on this issue.
However, of course, the final decision and the time it will be made mostly depends on assessments for protection of our national and state interests.
As an immediate neighbour, we are determined to build equally good relations with both Belgrade and Pristina.
It does not only depend on us but our neighbours' conduct whether we will manage to do that.
Setimes: Do you expect Macedonia to be given an invitation at the Bucharest Summit and how will this influence the security situation in the region?
Additionally, do you expect changes in the economic situation in the country?
A Macedonian soldier kisses his son good-bye before leaving on a peace-keeping mission to Afghanistan.
The country has contributed peacekeepers to several missions around the globe. [Getty Images]
Crvenkovski:The Republic of Macedonia has fulfilled all necessary criteria in order to obtain a NATO invitation.
Without doubt, our accession to the Alliance as well as accession of the other two Adriatic Charter countries -- Albania and Croatia -- will contribute much to further stabilising the region.
This has additional weight given Kosovo's declaration of independence and the risks derived from it.
Any additional assurances on politics and security stability -- and NATO membership offers such assurances -- is a strong impetus for an influx of new investment and economic development.
Setimes: Is the name dispute between Macedonia and Greece an obstacle to Macedonia's acceptance in NATO?
Crvenkovski: The name dispute between Macedonia and Greece is a bilateral dispute which in no way belongs to the criteria for membership, and in principle, it should not be an obstacle to our NATO integration.
Unfortunatelly, Greece as a full member of the Alliance, threatens to use its veto.
In such a way, it tries to impose its individual interest over the Alliance's interest in exchange for and at the expense of regional stability.
Setimes:What will happen if the veto is still used?
You and the government have a joint stance – if the choice comes down to the name or an NATO invitation, Macedonia must choose its name.
Crvenkovski: Frankly, I am hopeful this will not happen.
The Republic of Macedonia is sincerely and strongly committed to becoming a NATO member.
In the past years we have worked with dedication to achieving that goal and we deserve the invitation.
It is neither just nor in the spirit of the basic values which the Alliance rests upon to require us to pay for the membership by relinquishing our own national and cultural identity.
Setimes: You have visited Macedonian peacekeepers in Iraq.
What was the experience and how much does Macedonia gain from its contribution to these peacekeeping missions?
Crvenkovski: Macedonian soldiers are taking part in military missions in Iraq, Afghanistan, Bosnia and Herzegovina and Lebanon.
In this way, we are already behaving as a full and responsible NATO member and making our contribution to peace operations worldwide.
The Macedonian Army gives much more than it gets from such arrangements but we are fully aware of our part of responsibility and willing to face such challenge.
NATO Secretary-General Jaap de Hoop Scheffer (right) and Crvenkovski speak to reporters after a meeting at NATO headquarters last year. [Getty Images]
Setimes: Are you satisfied with the co-habitation with the government?
Crvenkovski: When it comes to key issues for the Republic of Macedonia I and the government have satisfactory co-operation and harmonised positions.
Certainly, cohabitation could and should be elevated to a higher level, but it is something that I would not like to speak specifically about in this period.
Setimes: How far is Macedonia on its way to full membership in the EU?
Are you satisfied with the pace of the reforms?
Crvenkovski: It is our goal to fulfill all necessary preconditions in 2008 in order to be given a date for the start of accession negotiations as well as to fully and successfully complete the dialogue on liberalisation of the visa regime.
Realistically, those are achievable goals.
I am just sorry that, because of our own weaknesses, we did not achieve them last year.
I am confident that reforms will intensify in the following few months.
Setimes: Do you expect Macedonia to receive a negotiation date by the end of the year?
Crvenkovski: The Republic of Macedonia has both institutional capacity and democratic potential and, more important, a strong determination to get a negotiation date by the end of 2008.
Setimes: Recently, the US ambassador recalled the need to complete implementation of the May agreement signed between the government and the Democratic Union of Integration (DUI).
Do you support implementation of this agreement?
Crvenkovski: Agreements are concluded to be implemented.
Otherwise, if one runs away from obligations undertaken, the sense of the political dialogue is lost.
I am hopeful that the parties that concluded the May agreement, in this case Prime Minister Gruevski and the leader of the DUI, Ali Ahmeti, are fully aware of this.
Setimes:You often travel to countries in the region.
What is your opinion about co-operation of the countries in the Balkans and how much, in your view, it is important?
Crvenkovski:Regional co-operation is of key importance.
I am happy with the fact that in this respect, the situation today is incomparably better than ten years ago.
The region is facing a new historical chance.
Political elites that give precedence to co-operation over confrontation are leading the countries.
And all of them are committed to the same democratic values and common European prospects.
That must be utilised.
Turkey Changes Its Constitution
Turkey's president signed a key package of constitutional amendments Friday, aimed at bringing the country more closely in line with EU standards.
By Fatih Baran for Southeast European Times in Istanbul - 25/05/04
President Ahmet Necdet Sezer signed the constitutional amendments Friday (21 May). [AFP]
President Ahmet Necdet Sezer signed a key package of constitutional amendments Friday (21 May), aimed at bringing domestic legislation closer to that of the EU.
The 10-article package was proposed by the ruling Justice and Development (AKP) government and supported by the opposition Republican People's Party (CHP) and the True Path Party (DYP).
With the passage of the amendments, the Turkish Constitution has been changed for the ninth time since 1982.
The current constitution was prepared by the military government after the 1980 coup and was applied in 1982.
The amendment package, drafted within the framework of Turkey's bid to join the EU, abolishes the controversial State Security Courts (DGM), removes the Office of the Chief of Staff's representative from the Higher Education Board (YOK), guarantees gender equality, abolishes capital punishment, places military expenditure under full Audits Office supervision and eliminates the seizure of printing houses.
Ten articles of the constitution have been changed:
The statement "men and women have equal rights" was added to Article 10.
"The execution of capital punishment" statement was removed from Article 15.
A passage in Article 17 mentioning capital punishment was removed, together with the statement "during implementation of the directives of executive powers in times of emergency rule".
The statement "unless convicted of crimes against the country's sovereignty, the principles of the republic and national security" in Article 30 was removed.
The clause in question concerned the seizure of printing houses.
The sentence "capital punishment cannot be used unless the country faces war or near-war conditions or for terrorism crimes," in Article 38 was removed. The sentence "no one can be sentenced to the death penalty" was added.
Parliament's authority to approve death sentences was annulled, as outlined in Article 87.
Article 90 was changed, allowing domestic laws to become subordinate to international laws approved through the proper procedure, in the event that they conflict.
The Office of Chief of General Staff's right to appoint a member of the YOK was removed from Article 131.
Article 143, which outlines the foundation and operation of the DGMs, was removed.
The Audit Department's authority, set in Article 160, was expanded and the sentence that calls for secret inquiries into the military's expenses was removed.
By law, constitutional amendments require a two-thirds majority in parliament for adoption.
Of the 526 deputies who attended the vote on the amendment package, 514 voted in favour of it.
Although parliament's action adds significantly to the progress Turkey has made towards EU standards, at least 20 additional articles of the constitution must be amended to bring the document into line with EU requirements.
According to Justice Minister Cemil Cicek, many articles do not comply with EU standards and with the generally accepted parliamentary system.
Croatia urged to speed up EU-required reforms
Croatia must step up the implementation of EU-required reforms over the next three months, if it wants to remain on track for joining the Union in 2010, EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn indicated on Tuesday.
(Reuters, AFP, AP, European Commission, Eupolitix, Europolitics.info - 08/04/08)
"There is plenty of work ahead, for instance, on judicial and public administration reform and in the fight against corruption," EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn said. [Getty Images]
The next three months will be critical for Croatia's bid to become the EU's 28th member in 2010 as hoped, a senior European Commission (EC) official indicated on Tuesday (April 8th) while urging Zagreb to step up its reform efforts.
''Croatia has good prospects of progress but also plenty of work ahead, for instance, on judicial and public administration reform and in the fight against corruption,'' EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn said after talks with Croatian Foreign Minister Gordan Jandrokovic.
''It is essential to do it by June, because otherwise the technical timetable becomes almost impossible.''
The EC has said it wants to complete entry talks with Croatia by autumn 2009, enabling it to enter the Union the following year.
The negotiations began in October 2005, and 16 of the 35 negotiating chapters have been opened since, with two of them provisionally closed.
Vincent Degert, the EC representative in Zagreb, said on Tuesday that up to ten of the 14 policy areas currently under discussion could be closed by the end of this year.
According to him, two new chapters would likely be opened this month and then a few more before France assumes the EU's six-month rotating presidency on July 1st.
"Overall, the accession negotiations with Croatia have been advancing well," Rehn said, voicing hope that Zagreb would take the necessary steps so talks on some of the more difficult chapters could begin by June.
The commissioner also congratulated Croatia for the invitation it received last week to join NATO.
Furthermore, Rehn noted that since the dispute between Croatia and Slovenia over border traffic had been resolved, there was no reason to postpone talks on fisheries and foreign policy.
Jandrokovic told journalists in Brussels that his country would make every effort to meet the required opening benchmarks and to be ready to present Zagreb's negotiating positions on them by June.
"We are ready to do it, and we will do it," he said.
He admitted in an interview Tuesday, however, that it would not be an easy task and would require a lot of hard work.
Following talks with Croatian Prime Minister Ivo Sanader last month, EC President Jose Manuel Barroso said the Commission would present this autumn an indicative timetable for the technical conclusion of the negotiations in 2009, provided Croatia met a number of conditions.
Jandrokovic said that, in his talks with Rehn, he had "especially emphasised Croatia's readiness to do whatever it takes to meet the criteria for full membership and to become a member of the EU in 2010".
NATO decision prompts Macedonia to step up name dispute negotiations
As disappointment prevails in Macedonia after the NATO summit in Bucharest last week, the government is holding consultations to resolve its name dispute with Greece.
By Marina Stojanovska for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 09/04/08
US President George W. Bush (left) speaks with Macedonian President Branko Crvenkovski (centre) and Prime Minister Nikola Gruevski at the NATO summit in Bucharest last week. [Getty Images]
Despite disappointment in Macedonia for failing to receive an invitation to join NATO last week, officials have vowed to keep pursuing membership.
On Monday (April 7th), the government announced that it would launch discussions this week to solve the ongoing name dispute with Greece, which cost Macedonia its NATO invitation.
Although the Alliance's members recognised that Macedonia had achieved the prerequisites for membership, the name problem remains a sticking point.
NATO said an invitation would be offered as soon as it was settled.
On Monday, President Branko Crvenkovski spoke with NATO Secretary-General Jaap de Hoop Scheffer, who reiterated that the dispute had blocked Macedonia's invitation.
He said, however, that as soon as it was resolved, NATO would automatically activate the country's membership process.
Crvenkovski said the state strategy on the issue must be defined but that the country's strategic goals should not be affected.
Prime Minister Nikola Gruevski echoed that view.
"We will take steps that will positively involve broader consultations with experts in the political and other public spheres," he said.
Macedonia has planned to intensify its efforts to end the dispute.
US Assistant Secretary of State Daniel Fried contacted Greek Foreign Minister Dora Bakoyannis on Monday to discuss whether Athens would approve further negotiations.
Fried also spoke with Macedonian leaders and to the relevant UN envoy, Matthew Nimetz.
On Monday, Gruevski met with the leaders of the main political parties to discuss the issue. He said he would ask the parties to publicly confirm whether they accept some of Nimetz's suggestions.
However, the stability of the government is in question, as the minority Albanian party within the ruling coalition is expected to demand early elections.
US President George W. Bush, who met with Crvenkovski and Gruevski in Croatia at the weekend, reiterated his support for Macedonia's NATO bid.
Speaking in Zagreb, Bush expressed regret that Macedonia received no invitation to NATO membership.
He praised the contribution of Macedonian soldiers serving with missions abroad and expressed hope that Macedonia would become a NATO member immediately after resolving the dispute.
"What is certain is that we want the process to continue, under the auspices of the UN, so that a mutually acceptable solution can be reached," a Greek government spokesman said.
BiH authorities tackle terrorist threat
Police in BiH say a group of suspects linked to the Wahhabi movement planned to unleash ethnic strife by attacking Catholic churches.
By Jusuf Ramadanovic for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo – 09/04/08
Anti-terrorist units of the BiH interior ministry have carried out two raids in recent weeks. [Getty Images]
Law enforcement officials in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) have conducted a series of raids recently to round up suspected terrorists.
On Friday (April 4th), authorities arrested a still-unidentified person for alleged links to terrorism.
The interior ministry said the suspect had arms and explosives for terrorist use.
Police searched two more locations in Sarajevo's Sedrenik and Barice quarters, where they found materials used for the production of explosives.
A mine, a hand grenade, ammunition, and other military devices were also found.
It was the second anti-terrorist raid in recent weeks ordered by the BiH prosecutor.
In March, a larger operation took place in Sarajevo and in Bugojno.
The earlier raid resulted in the arrests of five terrorism suspects. One was eventually released for lack of evidence.
The interior ministry says it believes that one of those five suspects, Rijad Rustempasic, was the leader; another, Edis Velic, reportedly fought in Chechnya.
Police searched six houses in the March raids, finding large quantities of arms and military equipment, antitank mines, laser devices, electronic equipment, surprise mines, topographic maps, drawings, manuals for production of explosive devices, detonators, and other items useful to terrorists.
All suspects are linked to the Wahhabi movement in BiH and are detained for alleged contacts with Mirsad Bektasevic, who last year was sentenced to eight years in prison for involvement in preparing terrorist actions.
Edis Velic was indicted for shooting a street vendor last year, while Rijad Rustempasic is allegedly a faithful supporter of Jusuf Barcic, a suspected leader of the BiH Wahhabi movement who died in a car accident last year.
The investigation revealed that the suspects allegedly were plotting acts of terrorism against Catholic churches throughout BiH.
The interior ministry's action was conducted in co-operation with the Intelligence Security Agency and Prosecutor's Office of BiH and follows several months of investigation and surveillance.
Kosovo, Albania resolve customs disagreement
Customs co-operation between Albania and Kosovo can serve the economic development of both countries.
By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Pristina – 04/07/11
Naim Huruglica, Kosovo Customs Service director. [Laura Hasani/SETimes]
At a meeting discussing economic co-operation between Kosovo and Albania, Kosovo Deputy Prime Minister Mimoza Kusari Lila and Albanian Prime Minister Sali Berisha decided to remove customs fees that are frustrating Kosovo exporters.
Building the 34km of road from Fierza to Koman in northern Albania was also discussed.
Berisha said that the current customs fee will stop being applied, which the Albanian Customs Director Flamur Gjymishka confirmed.
Kosovo Customs Service Director Naim Huruglica spoke to SETimes about the problem between the two governments, affirming that a solution is at hand and statistics show an increase in bilateral trade.
SETimes: At what stage now is the customs and taxes issue between Kosovo and Albania?
Huruglica: There is no big problem, except for the fact that in some cases the customs administration of the Republic of Albania does not accept the declared value of Kosovo exporters, and has increased the export value, forcing the Albanian import companies to pay more for VAT tax.
As a result, Kosovo products have become more expensive on the Albanian market.
SETimes: Did you contact official authorities in Tirana?
What future steps are expected?
Huruglica: Meetings were held.
The last one was between the two customs chiefs.
A tentative agreement was reached to work out practical difficulties, which could be realised through post-import verification in case the undeclared real value is suspicious.
SETimes: Can we expect customs tax removal between Kosovo and Albania altogether?
Would the elimination of the fees serve the economic development of both countries?
Huruglica: Kosovo and Albania do not apply a customs tax on each other's products.
Both countries are CEFTA members and the only tax charge is VAT, or excise, on certain goods.
The co-operation serves the economic development of both countries and statistics show trade increased.
In 2010, Kosovo imported goods worth 61m euros from Albania, or 52.33% more than in 2009, and it exported goods worth 23m euros, or 33.19% more than in 2009.
SETimes: What is the position of the business community in Kosovo on this issue?
Huruglica: The business community expressed its discontent over the difficulties they encountered and has been working to remove them.
SETimes: Would the reciprocity principle work between the two countries, and would Kosovo ask for it?
Huruglica: There is no need for reciprocity on issues that can be solved between the two governments.
Belgrade, Pristina agree on freedom of movement
The Belgrade and Pristina negotiating teams in Brussels drafted agreements on freedom of movement and birth records.
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade --04/07/11
Some have suggested the agreements a step in Serbia's eventual recognition of Kosovo. [Reuters]
While the Belgrade authorities are trying to present the first agreements with Pristina as a success that will help improve the lives of Kosovo Serbs, the opposition has branded them damaging to the national interest and the first step towards recognising Kosovo's independence.
After the talks in Brussels wrapped up, the head of the Serbian government's delegation, Borislav Stefanovic, insisted that the dialogue meant "neither an explicit nor an implicit recognition of Kosovo's independence".
Commenting on the statement by Pristina counterpart Edita Tahiri, that the result from Brussels was "the first step towards Serbia's recognising of Kosovo", he said such claims were untrue.
"Edita Tahiri said that for internal political reasons and due to great pressure from the Kosovo opposition," Stefanovic told reporters, adding that Serbia would continue to issue IDs and license plates to citizens of Kosovo.
According to the agreement, Kosovo citizens would be able to enter Serbia with Kosovo IDs, but the Serbian police will issue them a special certificate.
The same will be done with driver's licenses, as Belgrade is refusing to acknowledge Kosovo documents.
Drivers from Kosovo would have to take temporary license plates from the Serbian police when entering Serbia, if their vehicles have license plates with the Kosovo coat of arms.
The decisions on implementing the agreements, which were not signed, now need to be adopted by the governments in Belgrade and Pristina.
Their implementation, which may start as of November 1, will be monitored by a group comprised of representatives of the EU, Serbia and Kosovo.
Although Stefanovic tried to present the agreements as a way to improve the lives of Kosovo Serbs, the opposition fiercely accused him of violating state interests.
"Agreement with the representatives of the illegal state of Kosovo is in violation of the Constitution of Serbia and UN Security Council Resolution 1244, and a breach of the legal documents on which the sovereignty of Serbia is founded," Slobodan Samardzic, vice president of the opposition Democratic Party of Serbia, told SETimes.
Analysts also reacted differently to the agreements.
University of Belgrade Faculty of Political Sciences professor Predrag Simic told SETimes it was good the agreements were made, and that the EU would "certainly approve of the move by Belgrade and Pristina".
Asked whether the agreements were an indirect recognition of Kosovo, Simic said that "Belgrade knows full well what the red lines are in the dialogue with Pristina and that the Serbian government will not cross them."
However, director of the Kosovo Compromise project Aleksandar Mitic told SETimes that this was a step towards eventual recognition.
"Ever since the arrest of Ratko Mladic, we have witnessed growing pressure by Washington and Brussels to condition more concretely Serbia's EU integration through establishing good neighbourly relations with Kosovo.
The agreements are thus the logical step in the crawling process of Kosovo's recognition," Mitic said.
The agreements were also received differently by the Kosovo Serbs.
Milan Ivanovic, a representative of the Serbs from northern Kosovo, where Kosovo institutions have no authority, said the agreements were harmful to the Serb population and solidified Pristina's statehood.
"It is obvious that Serbia is giving up on Kosovo, this means giving Kosovo up for the sake of European Union candidacy," Ivanovic told the Belgrade media.
However, Rada Trajkovic, who represents Serbs living in Albanian enclaves, said the agreements would help her compatriots in Kosovo.
"After the agreements, Serbia has more credibility to deal with the issue of Kosovo and the enhancement of the local Serbs' living conditions, with support from the international community," she said.
Greece stops aid flotilla to Gaza
The new mission was attempting to commemorate last year's ill-fated Freedom Flotilla.
(Deutsche Welle, The Australian, CNN - 04/07/11; BBC, Haaretz, AFP, Reuters, Al Jazeera, AP, ANA-MPA- 03/07/11; ANA-MPA - 01/07/11)
Activists protest the Greek authorities' ban on Gaza-bound ships Saturday (July 2nd) on the island of Corfu. [Reuters]
A mission of activists planning to carry aid to the Gaza Strip faced a major setback Saturday (July 2nd), when Greek authorities stopped their fleet and arrested the captain of one of its US-flagged vessels, spurring fresh controversy.
John Klusmire was detained on charges of attempting to leave the port of Piraeus without permission and putting the lives of 36 passengers, four crew and ten journalists at risk.
He will remain in custody until a hearing Thursday.
Klusmire's ship is part of an aid fleet of ten boats called Free Gaza, which was heading for Gaza before it was stopped by Greek authorities.
The mission was to commemorate the first anniversary of the Freedom Flotilla, which tried to break the Gaza blockade in May 2010.
Back then, Israel raided the lead vessel, leaving nine Turkish activists dead.
The captain's arrest, which came after Greek Citizens Protection Minister Christos Papoutsis announced on Friday that all vessels with Greek or foreign flags bound for Gaza will be banned from departing Greek ports for the safety of passengers, spurred protests by pro-Palestinian activists in Athens.
They insisted Greece is bowing to pressure from Israel.
Campaigners have launched a hunger strike outside the US Embassy in Athens, accusing Greek authorities of trying to thwart the mission.
Over the past weeks, Greek authorities have prevented the fleet from sailing, citing "bureaucratic problems".
Activists have accused Israel of sabotaging the mission, a claim that is firmly rejected.
"The activists are trying to blame someone for their failure -- no doubt they have watched too many James Bond films," Israeli Foreign Minister Avigdor Lieberman told Army Radio in an interview Sunday.
"I welcome all the efforts that have been made to stop the flotilla," he added.
Greek Foreign Ministry spokesperson Grigoris Delavekouras told EUObserver that talks with Israel have played a role.
Analysts view the development as more evidence of warming bilateral ties.
The Islamic Hamas movement condemned Athens' move.
In a statement from Damascus, the organisation said the act is "inhuman and contrary to international laws and norms".
It urged the European Parliament and all humanitarian organisations to pressure Greece to allow the vessels to sail.
Meanwhile, the Quartet of Middle East peace mediators, which include the UN, the US, the EU and Russia, issued a statement Saturday, urging "all those wishing to deliver goods to the people of Gaza to do so through established channels, so that their cargo can be inspected and transferred via established land crossings."
In a statement Sunday, Greece defended its action, reiterating it is for safety's sake.
In the spirit of compromise, authorities proposed shipping the aid using existing channels that are acceptable for Israel.
Croatia's double milestone
The Balkan nation is set to become the next member of the EU in July 2013.
By Natasa Radic for Southeast European Times in Zagreb – 04/07/11
This year, on June 25th, Croatia had double reason to celebrate. [Reuters]
Just over two decades ago, Croatia declared independence from the former Yugoslavia.
This year, the June 25th anniversary came with another reason for celebration: the country has closed the final chapters in its EU negotiations process.
Six and a half years after beginning the talks, Croatia is now set to be the 28th member of the EU.
That will happen officially on July 1st, 2013.
In remarks commemorating independence day, Prime Minister Jadranka Kosor described accession as "an historic national project that makes the people of Croatia deeply proud".
"A European and democratic Croatia has been a national goal since our independence," Kosor said at a reception for members of the diplomatic corps.
"Now Croatia is recognised as the country with a strong democracy that respects the law and common EU values," she added.
The good news from Brussels came as the EU Council wrapped up its summit on June 24th.
While confirming the go-ahead, the Council also urged Zagreb to press ahead with needed changes.
"Croatia should continue its reform efforts with the same vigour, especially regarding the judiciary and fundamental rights, and be able fully to assume membership obligations from the date of accession," the final statement from the summit read.
"Monitoring reform efforts up to accession will give the necessary assurance to Croatia and current member states."
Although Croatia's political leaders are united in support of accession, public opinion is less so.
Polls show the number of EU supporters is again on the rise, but still no higher than 60%.
Ivan Grdesic, a prominent opinion maker and academic, told SETimes that with the hard work of completing the accession chapters now over, Croatia's political leaders will be competing to claim the credit -- and reap dividends at the ballot box.
"We will witness the attempt to prove who did the job best -- who was working 'night and day' to achieve the EU goal, and who should, therefore, be awarded in the upcoming parliamentary elections," Grdesic told SETimes.
"This is the problem for all political sides involved.
EU membership is not perceived as a national, strategic and generational goal, but rather as an instrument of political and party struggles."
Macedonia to Host "Dialogue Among Civilisations" Forum
Later this month, Macedonian President Boris Trajkovski and UNESCO Director General Koichuro Matsuura are sponsoring a regional forum aimed at promoting stability, tolerance and democracy in Southeast Europe.
(MIA - 11/08/03; UNESCO)
A two-day regional forum called "Dialogue Among Civilisations" will open in the Macedonian resort city of Ohrid on 29 August.
Organised jointly by Macedonia, UNESCO and the Appeal of Conscience Foundation, the forum will bring together the presidents of Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, Slovenia and Serbia-Montenegro, along with representatives of the UN, the EU, NGOs, and experts and intellectuals from about 20 countries.
The focus of the event will be strengthening stability, tolerance and democracy; enhancing cultural, ethnic and religious understanding; and promoting the principles of equality, rule of law and respect for human rights.
It aims to confirm the continuity and significance of related UN and UNESCO resolutions, reinforce the process of reconciliation, and address the concrete problems facing the Southeast European (SEE) region.
Macedonian President Boris Trajkovski and UNESCO Director General Koichuro Matsuura are co-sponsoring the forum.
The agenda includes panel discussions and related working group sessions on three key topics: peace and stability, democracy and civil society, and culture and diversity.
The participating heads of state will have the opportunity to make statements during the plenary sessions.
Praising Trajkovski for the "energy and initiative" put into preparing the meeting, Matsuura said it was indispensable for SEE countries to fulfil the commitments they have made "to democratic values and objectives, to full respect for human rights, and to mutual respect and tolerance among citizens of different ethnic origins" so that they can achieve "a civilised co-existence that is both sustainable and just".
During the UN General Assembly session on 9 November 2001, Trajkovski first presented his proposal for a regional forum in Ohrid as a concrete step towards implementing the Global Agenda for the Dialogue Among Civilisations and its Programme of Action adopted at the same session.
In April 2002, his idea received support during a high-level UNESCO meeting on strengthening regional co-operation in Southeast Europe.
"I understand the dialogue among different peoples, cultures and civilisations is a continuing process that should have a global dimension, promoting equality, the rule of law, protection of human rights and respect for cultural treasures and differences, while contributing to building of trust at the local, regional and international levels," Trajkovski said.
"Dialogue and co-operation among civilisations shall not be rooted in force and power, but in hope for peace and prosperity," he added, voicing confidence that the forum "will offer solutions to concrete problems with which the region is faced, and help our countries overcome current difficulties".
University reforms pit embattled government against professors, student unions
New legislation means that for the first time in decades, police are no longer banned from university campuses, a ban that had given protest organisers a safe haven from arrest.
By HK Tzanis for Southeast European Times in Athens -- 06/09/11
Demonstrators march through a central Athens boulevard on September 1st to protest a recently ratified bill on higher education reforms for Greece's universities and tertiary technical schools. [STR]
High-profile reforms in Greece's creaky higher education system late last month (August 24th) include the effective abolition of the all-encompassing "asylum status" enjoyed by education institutions, after an unprecedented parliamentary majority -- 250 out of 300 MPs -- ratified the framework law.
Beyond whatever ramifications in the country's higher education sector, approval by both mainstream parties -- the ruling socialist PASOK and main opposition centre-right New Democracy -- heightened speculation about a discreet "consensus" between the two major parties amid the ongoing economic and fiscal crisis.
Education Minister Anna Diamantopoulou, a former EU commissioner regarded as one of a handful of likely successors to current PM George Papandreou at the ruling party's helm, called the vote by parliament "historic", stressing that such consensus could be achieved in other areas.
Nevertheless, the main opposition party, buoyed by its lead in recent opinion polls and the government's failure to improve the economic outlook, flatly ruled out co-operation in the difficult months ahead.
"ND will never offer consensus, or rather, complicity in the mistaken [government policies] ...
Let it [the government] continue to seek a life jacket for its own incompetence and ineffectiveness," ND spokesman Yiannis Mihelakis said on August 30th.
Despite the broad political consensus for the education reforms, aimed at upgrading long-waning academic standards of both students and faculty, school "sit-ins" and one major street protest took place last week, mostly backed by professors' unions and leftist-party affiliated student groups.
For example, an "inaugural" mobilisation on Thursday (September 1st) drew about 5,000 youthful protesters who marched through central Athens.
Asked to outline his and other rectors' opposition to the reforms, Yiannis Mylopoulos, the outspoken head of Thessaloniki's Aristotelian University pointed to the "next day".
"That's the real and prolonged question: if universities will work better," Mylopoulos told SETimes.
"There is no question whatsoever of the [measures')] implementation; we are guarantors of legality and constitutionality," he added, while nevertheless noting the "constitutionality argument" that opponents have raised.
He also dismissed vociferous criticism that the university "asylum regime" is unique.
Vassilis Zotos, a noted architect/town planner and president of the local British Graduates Society, disagrees and criticises the system.
"Unfortunately, the only way to improve and change higher education in this country is to close universities for five years and then reopen them; while then allowing foreign universities to operate affiliates."
He told SETimes that he has steered clear of teaching positions in Greek universities since his return from London more than 40 years ago.
As for current criticism by professors' unions, he says, "There are 65,000 Greek college students around the world at present, and most are enrolled in systems that the current government wants to institute, yet most of the academic community here is against it … the majority of the people in the country are reasonable and commonsensical, but we're governed by a minority; the same [situation] exists in the universities."
Besides doing away with the early 1980s "asylum law" -- passed by a newly elected socialist government at the time -- other reforms include the elimination of party-affiliated ballots in student elections; changes in rectors' elections to reduce influence by party-affiliated student groups; obligatory registration by students every semester; limits on the time it takes to earn a degree; evaluation and certification of course studies; on-line publishing of textbooks and lecture notes, and establishment of a unified post-graduate studies school.
The framework law would be implemented in stages, according to Diamantopoulou.
The first will be completed a year from now.
An anti-drug quintet in the Balkans?
Russia is seeking to partner with four Balkan countries -- Albania, Macedonia, Montenegro and Serbia – in an effort to cut off narcotics trafficking.
By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Tirana -- 06/09/11
Heroin earns traffickers in the Balkans hundreds of billions of dollars a year, according to the chief of Russia's drug control agency. [Reuters]
Albania and Russia signed an agreement Friday (August 26th) to co-operate in the fight against drug smugglers.
The move, analysts say, is the latest indication that Moscow intends to play a leading role in the region when it comes to the issue of combating narcotics.
"The Russian attempt to be first violin in this initiative is evident," former Albanian diplomat Genc Mlloja told SETimes.
It was Albanian Interior Minister Bujar Nishani who inked the deal together with the head of Russia's Federal Drug Control Service, Victor Ivanov.
The two officials cited health and security risks posed by drugs and traffickers.
Moscow has already signed similar drug-fighting agreements with Serbia and Macedonia.
A recent Voice of Russia report said the country is seeking to form an international "quintet" of five countries – Albania, Macedonia, Montenegro, Russia and Serbia – that would act together in order to cut off drug routes going through Kosovo.
"Joint action by the quintet would be aided by generous intelligence sharing.
Russia, for instance, possesses vast drug intelligence from American and Afghan sources in Afghanistan.
The reaction to the initiative so far gives rise to hopes that the proposed front can be in place before January," the report added.
The stakes are potentially staggering.
Ivanov told Albanian authorities that if European countries fail to take decisive measures against heroin trafficking, criminal groups will make as much as $500 billion per year.
Albania "is one of the first countries that feels the consequences of this traffic, because the known corridor along Turkey, Bulgaria, Macedonia and other Mediterranean countries makes Albania one of the first countries that encounters this traffic", Ivanov added.
Mlloja said this agreement on fighting drugs "is a plus" for Albania, especially as it remains described in international reports as a country with "penetrable" borders.
"Pristina authorities have always expressed their readiness and determination for an un-compromised fight against narco-trafficking," Mlloja says, adding that these authorities could said as much to Ivanov himself.
But Ivanov excluded Pristina from his tour.
"There are about 375 drugs cartels that supply Europe and Russia.
Each of them has its own logo and stamp.
We see Albania as a transit country of drugs towards the European countries.
Russia has not recognised Kosovo independence, but according to data from the partner services, there is some preparation of narcotics there, which is later divided into portions and sold," Albanian TV Alsat quoted Ivanov as saying.
Co-operation will include exchanges of information, planning attacks on criminal groups, and co-ordinating the joint work of respective agencies.
EU counterterrorism chief: al-Qaeda weakened, but threats remain
Osama bin Laden's death and the elimination of other key al-Qaeda operatives have weakened the organization, but threats remain.
(The Irish Times - 06/09/11; AFP, Reuters, AP, New York Times, RTE, Global Post, CNN, Europolitics, Xinhua - 05/09/11)
The towers of the World Trade Center were struck by hijacked commercial airplanes on September 11th 2001. [Reuters]
Terrorist attacks similar to those in the United States a decade ago are unlikely today, the EU's counterterrorism coordinator Gilles de Kerchove said on Monday (September 5th).
But the fight against al-Qaeda and organisations of this type still faces risks, he warned, citing the possibility of terrorist groups taking advantage of power vacuums in the wake of the Arab Spring revolts as one.
"Today an attack of the scale and sophistication of 9/11 is no longer possible," de Kerchove said at a news conference in Brussels marking the 10th anniversary of the September 11th 2001 attacks in the United States.
"Does it mean that we're completely out of the threat?
Probably not."
Al-Qaeda has been significantly weakened by the killing of its leader, Osama bin Laden, in early May, the elimination of other senior members of the network and the financial problems it is believed to be facing, according to the EU official.
The NATO-led war in Afghanistan and the reinforced international co-operation in the wake of the 9/11 attacks also contributed to this, de Kerchove, a Belgian academic and former government official, said.
"Internally we are much better equipped today than we were ten years ago," Reuters quoted him as telling reporters in Brussels.
"That does not mean we will prevent all the plots, all the attacks, but we'll try to be more efficient in preventing, in investigating and prosecuting terrorism and in minimising the consequence of the terrorist attack."
News of a new blow to the once mighty organisation came from Pakistan also on Monday, when the country's military announced the capture of three high-ranking al-Qaeda operatives in the southwestern city of Quetta.
Among those detained by Pakistani agents, working in co-operation with the CIA, was Younis al-Mauritani, whose main responsibility was to plan attacks against Western countries' interests across the globe.
"Al-Mauritani was tasked personally by Osama bin Laden to focus on hitting targets of economical importance in United States of America, Europe and Australia," the Boston-based Global Post quoted the Pakistani military as saying in a statement.
"He was planning to target United States economic interests including gas/oil pipelines, power generating dams and strike ships/oil tankers through explosive-laden speed boats in international waters."
Although al-Qaeda no longer has the capacity to stage attacks similar in scope to the 9/11 ones, it is still able to carry out small-scale "opportunistic" actions, de Kerchove said on Monday.
The terrorist threat the world faces today has become "much more complex and much more diversified," he told reporters in Brussels.
The EU counter-terrorism co-ordinator voiced concern that the current security vacuum in Libya might have allowed members of al-Qaeda's North African branch to increase their arms arsenal by looting, including of surface-to-air missiles, potentially endangering air travel.
"They have had the possibility to have had access to weapons, including small arms and machine guns, or certain surface-to-air missiles which are extremely dangerous," de Kerchove said.
Another issue of concern for him, according to the AFP, was "the dismantling of the security services in Tunisia and Egypt" in the wake of the anti-government protests that shook the two countries earlier this year.
"You cannot have a security vacuum," de Kerchove said, urging to help the process of transition in such countries.
NATO Summit Wraps Up in Istanbul
Key agreements reached during NATO's two-day summit in Istanbul included a decision to launch a training programme for Iraqi security forces and a commitment to boost troop levels in Afghanistan.
By Mustafa Azizoglu for Southeast European Times in Istanbul - 30/06/04
The 17th NATO summit in Istanbul was held Monday and Tuesday (28 June and 29 June), and gathered 46 heads of state and government. [AFP]
The 17th summit of NATO heads of state and government ended Tuesday (29 June) in Istanbul.
Among the most important agreements reached during the two-day event were the decision to launch a training programme for Iraqi security forces and a commitment to boost troop levels in Afghanistan.
Leaders of the 26-member Alliance welcomed Monday's handover of power from US-led coalition forces to Iraqi authorities, two days earlier than expected.
They agreed to help the Iraqi government train its security forces and offered co-operation to the Middle East region in general.
Agreement was reached despite continuing differences over NATO's role, with French President Jacques Chirac insisting that training be conducted by Alliance members under their own flags, not NATO's.
"There's no point in us standing here and saying, 'All the previous disagreements have disappeared.' They haven't," said British Prime Minister Tony Blair.
Nevertheless, the summit has paved the way for NATO's first mission in Iraq.
Alliance leaders also agreed to provide an additional 3,500 troops for the 6,500-strong International Security Assistance Force in Afghanistan.
Afghan President Hamid Karzai attended the final summit session and appealed to NATO to send extra peacekeepers immediately to help improve security in his country ahead of the September presidential and legislative ballots.
"The Afghan people need that security today, not tomorrow," he said.
While in Istanbul, US President George W. Bush addressed students at Galatasaray University.
Against the backdrop of the Ortakoy Mosque and the Bosphorus Bridge, which links Europe and Asia, he answered criticism of his policies and sought to reassure Muslim nations.
"Some people in Muslim cultures identify democracy with the worst of Western popular culture and want no part of it," he said. "When I speak about the blessings of liberty, coarse videos and crass commercialism are not what I have in mind.
There is nothing incompatible between democratic values and high standards of decency," Bush said.
He also strongly backed Turkey's bid to join the EU.
"As a European power, Turkey belongs in the Union," Bush said.
"Your membership would also be a crucial advance in relations between the Muslim world and the West, because you are part of both."
In other developments at the summit, NATO leaders agreed that the SFOR mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina will be handed over to an EU force by the end of the year.
Three countries hoping to join the Alliance -- Albania, Croatia and Macedonia -- were praised for their recent progress, but did not receive an indication as to when they might become NATO members.
UN Envoy Says Premature Launch of New Cyprus Process Inadvisable
Now is not the time to initiate a new round of Cyprus reunification talks, a senior UN official said Wednesday, citing unfavourable conditions for negotiation.
(The New York Times, i-Newswire - 23/06/05; UN News Centre, AP, The Scotsman, Cyprus News Agency - 22/06/05)
UN Undersecretary General for Political Affairs Kieran Prendergast (left) shakes hands with Turkish Cypriot leader Mehmet Ali Talat during his trip to the divided island. [Getty Images]
A senior UN official told the Security Council on Wednesday (22 June) that although both the Greek Cypriots and the Turkish Cypriots want a settlement ending Cyprus's division, he could not recommend a new round of talks.
"Launching an intensive new process prematurely would be inadvisable," UN Undersecretary General for Political Affairs Kieran Prendergast said, briefing the Council on his stops in Cyprus, Greece and Turkey earlier this month.
"Nothing positive would be served by a new effort that ended, as the previous two efforts did, in high-profile failure, or else in a frustrating stalemate."
The latest international effort to unify Cyprus collapsed in April last year, when the Greek Cypriots overwhelmingly rejected a UN-sponsored plan for a settlement.
Although the majority of Turkish Cypriots supported the proposed deal, only the internationally recognised Greek Cypriot part of the Mediterranean island eventually joined the EU on 1 May 2004.
Prendergast noted there have been positive developments since then, including "cordial contacts" maintained between Greek Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot politicians in a bid to promote mutual understanding.
"There are useful contacts at other levels too, whether among experts on particular subjects or among ordinary people now that they are able cross to the other side," Prendergast added.
On the other hand, he said, there appears to be a wide gap between the stated positions of the two parties, and mutual confidence is low.
Although the two parties say they want a solution, the prerequisites for achieving a deal are missing, he said.
"Outsiders can help, but it is the parties who must summon the vision, courage and political will needed to make a settlement, with all that this implies by way of compromise," said Prendergast.
"Leaders have to lead, not just follow their supporters."
Greek Cypriot President Tassos Papadopoulos believes the plan finalised by UN General Secretary Kofi Annan last year gave the Turkish Cypriot side and Turkey "nearly everything they wanted, more than they needed, and more than was fair," Prendergast told the Council.
Turkish Cypriot President Mehmet Ali Talat, meanwhile, said that his side would be "prepared to entertain minor changes within the parameters of the plan, but he believed that it was very important to have a clear and final list of demands from the Greek Cypriot side," according to the UN envoy.
Talat also expressed disappointment with the Security Council's failure to react to Annan's good offices report of 28 May last year and ease restrictions on the Turkish Cypriots.
Annan has indicated that he intends to move "very carefully" in the search of a solution, given the situation.
Robust Growth in Romanian Card Market
The Romanian credit and debit cards market grew in the last twelve months by almost 25 per cent, and there is still plenty of room for further expansion.
By Razvan Amariei for Southeast European Times in Bucharest – 23/06/05
There are now about 3,100 ATMs available all over Romania, compared to 2,165 two years ago. [Getty Images]
Ten years ago, when a local bank launched Romania's first credit card, only one shop in Bucharest's downtown was able to accept electronic payments.
Nowadays, there are about 6.2m credit and debit cards in Romanians' wallets and that number is climbing.
According to statistics from the Romanian National Bank (BNR), about 1.2m new cards were issued during the past 12 months.
Overall, the growth rate was about 25 per cent; it was higher in Bucharest, were it reached 40 per cent.
Experts say if this pace continues, Romania could have 7m valid cards in circulation by the end of this year.
The value of transactions has also grown: from 3.7 billion euros in 2003 to 5.3 billion euros in 2004.
In the first quarter of 2005 alone, it totaled 2.1 billion euros.
Banks expect credit cards, rather than debit cards, to show the most spectacular growth.
Today they only represent about 5 per cent of the total number of cards in Romania, but this proportion could double by December, bank officials say.
The boom has had side effects, including an expansion of ATM networks.
There are now about 3,100 ATMs available all over Romania, compared to 2,165 two years ago.
Businesses in the retail and service areas have been forced to invest in point of service (POS) machines, with more than 10,000 in operation by the fall of 2004.
Although international giants Visa and MasterCard dominate the Romanian market, other companies are starting to issue their own cards.
Online commercial transactions also are growing.
Launched more than a year ago, the 3D Secure platform has already hosted $4m in transactions, making Romania a pioneer in Southeast Europe.
Even though more than half were external deals attracted by the smaller fees, there is a considerable hope for the future.
Some foresee a growth of up to 500 per cent by the end of the year for transactions originating in Romania.
Others believe online transactions, which now represent less than 0.1 per cent of total electronic transactions, might reach 10 per cent to 15 per cent in three years.
Yet some Romanians remain wary.
"I like to receive my salary the old way, from our company's cashier.
I simply don't trust the machines," explains Dumitru Purcelea, a 53-year-old electrician.
"I feel better with cash in my pocket.
If I go to the supermarket or to the restaurant and my card doesn't work, what would it be like," says Tina Manescu, a 26-year-old secretary.
Such opinions have been buttressed by card related crimes, including the installation in a Bucharest neighbourhood of a fake cash machine, which read the information on users' cards.
It's a sign that Romanian criminal groups who emptied the bank accounts of thousands of Westerners by cloning their cards have now turned their eyes to their own country.
Ancient Thermal City to Be Flooded in Turkey
Archeologists, environmentalists and international NGOs are joining together to try to find a way to save an 1,800-year-old archeological site, due to be flooded this November by the waters from a new dam.
By Allan Cove for Southeast European Times – 23/06/05
The 1,800-year-old city of Allianoi will be flooded in November by the Yortanli Dam. [File]
The world's oldest known ancient thermal city, Allianoi, stands to be flooded when the Yortanli Dam begins operation this November.
Located in the very centre of the planned dam lake, it will be submerged under some 17 metres of water.
If no solution is found, Turkey may lose a significant historical site.
To help save the 1,800-year-old city, environmentalists and other volunteers have formed the Allianoi Initiative Group, with the slogan "Don't Let Allianoi Be Flooded".
"A 2,000-year history is being sacrificed for a 50 to 60-year-old project.
We don't say that the dam should not be constructed, but the project should be modified in a way that will prevent Allianoi from being ruined," says the group's spokesman, Arif Ali Cangi.
It has received support from the EU, which recently decided to financially support preservation efforts at Allianoi under its "Culture 2000" programme.
The Pan-European Federation for Heritage -- a non-profit umbrella organisation consisting of more than 200 NGOs -- joined with the European Council and UNESCO in writing a letter to Turkish Foreign Minister Abdullah Gul, seeking help in rescuing Allianoi and its Roman baths.
Since the Turkish government, however, has stated its firm intention to open the dam on schedule, archaeologists have launched a massive effort to salvage artefacts discovered at the site before it is submerged.
Since 1994, numerous parts of sculptures, ceramic pieces, metallic findings and glass artifacts have been recovered, spanning the Roman to Byzantine periods.
The State Water Affairs (DSI) agency has put forth a plan for the site, proposing that it the ancient buildings be coated with clay so that they won't be damaged under water.
Archeologists say this would simply inflict further damage.
Another approach under consideration is to move the thermal spring buildings to another location.
Villagers in the area, many of whom earn their living from agriculture, have mixed feelings.
The dam will provide water needed for irrigation.
But the flooding of Allianoi will also destroy a part of Turkey's cultural heritage, and the potential to attract tourists.
Throughout history, Allianoi was known as the "native land of the health god Asklepion".
Established in the Hellenistic Age, it achieved prominence in the 2nd century under the rule of the Roman Emperor Hadrianus.
For over 15 centuries, it enjoyed the reputation of an excellent healing centre, with spring waters in the therapeutic 45 to 55 centigrade range.
Recent excavations have revealed two ornate gates, streets with amazingly clean marble stones, shops, houses with perfectly protected mosaics, large squares, public fountains and insulas -- places to rest after a bath.
The latest findings were some of the most perfectly protected ever seen in an archaeological site, because they were covered by alluvial soil.
Human rights violations persist in Macedonia
Although police beatings are declining in Macedonia, the further reduction of human rights violations will require a collective effort.
By Dmitar Bocevski for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 14/08/08
"An appropriate legal framework is of crucial importance, but real improvement will happen only when laws are upheld and when personnel practices and customs change," said Erwan Fouere, EU representative in Macedonia. [File]
In the first half of 2008, NGOs report that most human rights complaints in Macedonia cite brutal beatings by urban intervention units -- Macedonia's Alfa and the Special Rapid Deployment Unit of the interior ministry.
A high number of police human rights abuses go unreported.
Reasons vary, reflecting the public's lack of confidence in the police and judicial system.
Most discouraging is the low number of cases that go to court and an even lower number of rulings in favour of the plaintiff.
Many victims are reluctant to sue because of personal or family fears or the threat of harassment.
Notorious judicial inefficiency and massive bureaucracy also discourage individuals from seeking justice.
However, the All for Fair Trials Coalition, Citizens' Initiative Centre, Democratic Development and Election Centre and the Roma Women's Rights Forum – Arka, in co-operation with the UN's Anti-Torture Committee, are some of the NGOs implementing a project to support human rights.
Since 2004, they have provided free legal assistance to victims.
Assistance in filing complaints with the Internal Control Division of the interior ministry, meetings with the public ombudsman, filing of lawsuits, presentation of the necessary medical documentation in court and other activities are how NGOs assist victims.
"In 2006, 62 complainants reported bodily harm by the police, along with rude and unprofessional behaviour.
In 2007, there were 51 cases of police abuse, and in the first half of this year, there were 27 new cases.
Although we see a downward trend, it is still a long way from elimination," said Anica Tomic Stojkovska of the All for Fair Trials Coalition.
A meeting of Macedonia and France's ombudsmen, Idjet Memeti and Jean-Paul Delevoye, and the EU representative in Macedonia, Erwan Fouere, generated some statements that could serve as future guidelines for protecting human rights.
"Transparency is the most efficient tool against torture.
When one is arrested, it shouldn't mean the loss of human rights.
For example, in France, the ombudsman appoints citizens who inspect prisons and penal institutions weekly," said Delevoye.
"In this country, many reforms in justice, freedom and security are under way, but in order for real changes to occur, a shift must take place in the attitude of police officers, administration and prison personnel.
An appropriate legal framework is of crucial importance, but real improvement will happen only when laws are upheld and when personnel practices and customs change," said Fouere.
The Internal Control Division of the interior ministry refused several opportunities to provide its view of the human rights situation.
Serbs caught in diplomatic bind over Kosovo, Ossetia comparisons
While leaders in Pristina and Tirana reject any links between the Kosovo conflict and the fight over Abkhazia and South Ossetia, Serbs find themselves caught in a diplomatic bind.
By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 14/08/08
"International conflicts cannot be solved by force, violence and violations of international law," Serbian Secretary for Kosovo Oliver Ivanovic said. [B92]
Kosovo President Fatmir Sejdiu said on Tuesday (August 12th) that his country's situation cannot be compared to that of any other area in the world, including Abkhazia and South Ossetia.
Sejdiu said Kosovo is a sui generis case, with distinct historical, legal, political and constitutional specifics involved.
"Those who oppose Kosovo's independence want to qualify Kosovo as a precedent for other solutions, but I think the arguments prove something different," Sejdiu said.
Deputy Prime Minister Hajredin Kuqi echoed that stance, insisting that Kosovo "is a special case".
Serbia, meanwhile, finds itself in a diplomatic quandary.
With Georgia moving to assert its "territorial integrity" and Russia sending troops to guard against alleged atrocities, Belgrade risks either alienating a key ally or undermining its position on Kosovo.
"It would be logical for Serbia to use the situation in Georgia in its diplomatic struggle against Kosovo independence," the Belgrade-based site B92 wrote on Wednesday.
"However, in so doing, Belgrade would find itself in a Catch-22:
[It] would have to support the principle of territorial integrity, and that would lead to conflict with Moscow officials, whose support Belgrade is counting on at the UN Security Council." Backing South Ossetia and Russia, meanwhile, "would undermine Belgrade's arguments against Kosovo independence", B92 wrote.
Serbia's Secretary for Kosovo, Oliver Ivanovic, suggested that the world had a "lesson" to learn from both conflicts.
"International conflicts cannot be solved by force, violence and violations of international law," he said.
According to Kosovo analyst Ilir Dugolli, however, the Georgia and Kosovo cases are completely different.
"Parallels on that are false," he said.
"Kosovo had equal representation in the former Yugoslav Federation; it was an international protectorate waiting to resolve its final status.
The will of the Kosovo people for independence is unquestionable, even to those who don't like or agree [with] it," said Dugolli, a member of the Kosovo Institute for Policy Research and Development.
Kosovo neighbour Albania, meanwhile, backs Georgia on the grounds of territorial integrity, while also insisting that Kosovo is a special case.
Tirana fully supports the integrity and sovereignty of Georgia and rejects any parallel with Kosovo, Albanian Prime Minister Sali Berisha said.
Minorities cannot be used to justify a military intervention, he added.
"There are minorities everywhere, and if the minorities are used, if military force is used, then the international order is in serious danger."
The foreign ministry urged all sides to avoid any further escalation.
EU ministers back plan to monitor Georgia cease-fire
EU foreign ministers agreed on Wednesday to consider a plan for sending monitors to observe the cease-fire in Georgia but appeared divided on the 27-nation bloc's future relationship with Russia.
(AFP - 14/08/08; AP, Reuters, AFP, DPA, BBC, VOA, FT - 13/08/08)
A tractor hauling refugees passes in front of a Georgian Army position 45km from Tbilisi on Wednesday (August 13th). [Getty Images]
The EU said on Wednesday (August 13th) it was ready to send monitors to Georgia's breakaway region of South Ossetia to observe the implementation of a cease-fire signed by Moscow and Tbilisi less than 24 hours earlier.
"The EU must be ready to ... support all efforts, including those of the United Nations and the OSCE, for a lasting and peaceful settlement of the conflicts in Georgia," EU foreign ministers stated after an emergency meeting in Brussels.
The six-point deal brokered by French President Nicolas Sarkozy, whose country currently holds the six-month rotating EU presidency, provides that Russia and Georgia must end hostilities and provide free access to humanitarian aid.
In addition, Georgian forces must withdraw to their usual bases and the Russians to their pre-conflict positions.
The deal envisions international talks on security and stability in South Ossetia and Abkhazia, the other Georgian breakaway region.
The frozen conflict flared up last week when Georgia moved combat forces into South Ossetia, which broke away from Tbilisi's control in 1992 and has Moscow's backing.
Russia struck back massively, also bombing Georgia proper, well beyond South Ossetia's borders.
Denouncing Russian actions, British Foreign Secretary David Miliband said the sight of Russian tanks on Georgian territory and the Russian blockade of Georgia's Black Sea port of Poti "are a chilling reminder of times that ... we had hoped had gone by".
The observers the EU plans to send to South Ossetia would supplement the 200 OSCE monitors already on the ground.
Finnish Foreign Minister Alexander Stubb, the OSCE's chairman this year, said he had proposed dispatching another 100 monitors.
French Foreign Minister Bernard Kouchner, who presided over Wednesday's meeting, voiced optimism that Russia would not oppose an EU observer mission.
He noted, however, that any EU peacekeeping mission would require the approval of the UN Security Council, where Russia has veto power.
EU foreign policy chief Javier Solana said he would discuss the possibility of a peacekeeping operation at the EU foreign ministers' next meeting in Avignon, France, on September 5th and 6th.
Several Eastern European member nations are calling for a freeze in relations with Moscow in retaliation for its actions in Georgia.
"Of course, some consequences must result from the aggression," said Lithuanian Foreign Minister Petras Vaitiekunas.
Germany, however, warned against isolating Russia and returning to the past.
The crisis will be the subject of a NATO foreign ministers' emergency meeting next Tuesday.
US Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice requested the meeting "as an opportunity to consult ... about the implications of the Russian military actions in Georgia", the US mission to NATO said on Wednesday.
Meanwhile, the leaders of NATO members Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania and Poland and non-NATO member Ukraine urged the 26-nation Alliance to enroll Georgia in the NATO Membership Action Plan to prevent future attacks by Russia.
Business: More Europeans facing poverty, survey says
More than two thirds of Greeks say they have gotten poorer, and similar results are recorded in neighbouring countries.
Also in business news: a joint Croatian/Hungarian venture discovers natural gas at the Zalata-Dravica field.
A woman begs for money in Athens.
Greece has seen rising poverty levels as a result of the global financial crisis and the country's budgetary meltdown. [Getty Images]
Poverty has grown in the continent over the past year, 60% of Europeans believe, according to a Eurobarometer survey of the social impact of the global financial crisis published on Tuesday (June 22nd).
In Greece, 85% of people believe they have grown poorer compared to last year.
Bulgaria is next with 82%, while 77% in Romania see their situation as getting worse.
In Cyprus, 66% of respondents experienced a downturn in their financial status over the past 12 months.
Low-cost air company Easy Jet started operations in Kosovo on June 19th.
The first round trip was completed from Basel, Switzerland, to Pristina.
The route will operate four times a week, and is expected to serve up to 20,000 passengers by the end of October.
Serbian Prime Minister Mirko Cvetkovic opened a new pharmaceutical factory at Galenika's plant in Zemun on Monday (June 21st).
The investment is worth more than 50m euros and will create 150 new jobs.
The annual capacity of the new factory is approximately 2 billion tablets and 100 million capsules, which should double the total production capacity of the drug maker.
Croatian Prime Minister Jadranka Kosor and Russian counterpart Vladimir Putin affirmed bilateral economic co-operation during a meeting on June 19th in Moscow.
Kosor said she expects that parliament will soon ratify a law on Croatia's participation in the South Stream project.
The pipeline will carry gas from Russia through the Black Sea to Central Europe.
While in Moscow, Kosor opened an office of Croatia's Chamber of Commerce.
Macedonian President Gjorge Ivanov and visiting Czech counterpart Vaclav Klaus attended a Macedonian-Czech business forum on Tuesday (June 22nd) in Skopje.
They agreed to further develop bilateral economic ties.
On the sidelines of the forum, an agreement on the establishment of a Macedonia-Czech business council was signed.
Croatian oil company INA and Hungary's MOL have discovered significant amounts of natural gas in the Zalata-Dravica field on the Croatian side of the Podravska Slatina-Zalata contract area, INA announced on Wednesday (June 23rd).
The joint project to explore the Drava basin was launched in 2006.
The two companies have equal stakes of 50% and share the costs and production.
Turkish Labour and Social Security Minister Omer Dincer revealed details Wednesday (June 23rd) of a new training programme.
The project, which will run in 111 centres in Turkey's 81 provinces, aims to increase the efficiency of vocational training for employees in the industrial sectors, strengthening the labour market.
The Romanian government approved an emergency ordinance Wednesday (June 23rd) that will boost the share of profits that state companies must contribute to the public budget, and enforce new taxes for individuals.
Under the new rules, state firms must give up to 90% of their profits to the budget, compared to the current 50%.
Food vouchers, childcare and vacation money will be taxed at 16%.
Deductible income on intellectual property products will be reduced from 40% to 20% in an effort to avoid tax evasion.
The measures are part of the government's anti-crisis efforts.
(Various sources -- 18/06/10-25/06/10)
Olympics: "Red Sharks" bite Greece
Montenegro's water polo team remains undefeated in its quest for gold, while Croatia and Serbia racked up victories in the same sport.
Montenegro's Mladjan Janovic shoots against Emmanouil Mylonakis of Greece during a preliminary water polo match at the Olympic Sports Centre on Thursday (August 14th) in Beijing. [Getty Images]
Montenegro's water polo team defeated Greece 10-6.
Mladjan Janovic, Vladimir Jojkovic, Predrag Jokic and Boris Zlokovic had two goals apiece, while Nikola Vukcevic and Milan Ticic each managed one.
Georgias Ntoskas led the scoring for Greece, with two goals.
Bulgarian Greco-Roman wrestler Nikolay Gergov beat his Turkish opponent, Seref Eroglu, 3-1 in the 66kg category.
In the 96kg event, Kaloyan Dinchev lost to Marek Svec of the Czech Republic, 3-1.
Croatia defeated Germany in men's water polo, 13-5.
Damir Buric scored three goals, while two each went to Maro Jokovic, Mile Slodlaka, Pavo Markovic and Miho Boskovic.
Zdeslav Vrdoljak and Samir Varac contributed one each.
Germany's top scorer, Marc Politze, had six shots on goal but only two slipped past the goalkeeper.
In women's beach volleyball, the Greek doubles team of Vasiliki Karantasiou and Vasiliki Arvaniti lost 39-43 to Brazil's Renata Ribeiro and Talita Rocha.
Another duo, Efthalia Koutroumanidou and Maria Tsiartsiani, came up short in the same event.
Archer Elpida Romantzi lost to Korea's Park Sung-Hyun in the women's individual 1/8 eliminations.
And in Greco-Roman wrestling, Theodoros Tounousides lost to Georgia's Ramaz Nozadze in the 96kg category.
Romanian swimmer Razvan Ionut Florea finished second in the men's 200m backstroke semifinal, with a time of 1:565.45.
In gymnastics, Flavius Koczi was the sole representative of the Balkans in the men's individual all-around.
He placed 18th in the event, which China's Yang Wei won.
In women's table tennis, Romania lost to Hong Kong, 0-3.
Serbia's men's water polo team beat the United States 4-2 on Thursday in a low-scoring, defence-oriented game.
Dusko Pijetlovic, Aleksandar Sapic, Vanja Udovicic and Vladimir Vujasinovic had one goal each; Peter Varellas scored both US goals.
In men's volleyball, the Serbian squad lost to Poland, 1-3.
Turkey suffered a further disappointment as weightlifter Tanir Sagir exited the men's 77kg event on Wednesday, failing in three snatch attempts at 165kg.
Sagir was the defending Olympic champion.
In sailing, Ali Kemal managed only an 18th-place finish, while swimmer Serkan Atasay was eliminated from the men's 200m individual medley qualification, finishing 42nd out of 46 with a time of 2:05:25.
Teammate Buse Dilara Gunaydin failed to make it through the women's 200m breaststroke qualifier -- she finished 32nd, with 2:31.86.
Rounding out the series of losses, Greco-Roman wrestlers Seref Erogul and Seref Tutenk lost in the 66kg and 74kg categories, respectively, while boxer Bahram Muzaffer failed in the men's 81kg.
Various sources – 14/08/08
Culture and Sports: Christmas in Athens
Carousels, a sweetshop village and Santa's workshop were among the festive activities in Athens this holiday season.
Also in culture and sports: Fuad Muzurovic becomes coach of Bosnia and Herzegovina's national football team for the second time, and Emir Kusturica announces the premiere of an opera based on his movie "Time of the Gypsies".
A child talks with Santa Claus and an elf in Santa's Workshop staged for children in central Athens on Thursday (December 21st). [Getty Images]
Athens turned three of its main squares into festive sites for Christmas, setting up two carousels and a sweetshop village.
Athens Mayor Theodoros Behrakis launched the activities, lighting the large Christmas tree at Syntagma Square on December 21st.
Santa Claus invited all the children to his workshop, where children could watch elves making toys.
Artist Pashk Pervathi, Tirana football club coach Shyqyri Rreli and journalist Filip Cakuli were among eight Albanian personalities honoured by President Alfred Moisiu for their accomplishments in the fields of art, sports, culture, medicine, justice and diplomacy in 2006.
Pervathi was awarded the Golden Naim Frasheri Order, while the other three received the Grand Master Order.
Bosnia and Herzegovina's (BiH) football association announced the appointment of Fuad Muzurovic as coach of the national football team.
Muzurovic previously coached the team from 1995-1997.
He replaces Blaz Sliskovic, who was sacked earlier this year due to the team's poor performance in the Euro 2008 qualifiers.
An exhibition featuring Macedonian painter Novica Trajkovski opened at the Museum of Contemporary Art in Skopje.
It includes 32 oil paintings grouped in five topical cycles.
The exhibition runs through January 26th.
Director Emir Kusturica announced that the premiere of an opera based on his 1989 movie "Time of the Gypsies" would be held at the Opera Bastille in Paris on June 22nd, 2007.
It will be staged by the rock band No Smoking Orchestra -- which features Kusturica as the bass guitar player.
(Various sources – 20/12/06-27/12/06)
International forces attacked by Kosovo Serbs
Several UN police officers and KFOR troops were injured during clashes with Serb protesters in Kosovo's ethnically divided town of Mitrovica on Monday. It was the worst violence since Kosovo declared independence four weeks ago.
(CNN, Reuters, AP, AFP, DPA, BBC, B92 - 17/03/08; UN News Centre - 16/03/08; AFP - 15/03/08; Reuters, Balkan Insight - 14/03/08)
Kosovo Serbs throw stones at KFOR soldiers in Mitrovica on Monday (March 17th). [Getty Images]
The UN administration in Kosovo withdrew its police forces from Serb-populated parts of the ethnically divided town of Mitrovica on Monday (March 17th) after clashes broke out with Serb protesters.
A number of international troops serving with KFOR were injured.
"There are reports of possible gunfire and some grenades used against UN police and KFOR," CNN quoted UNMIK spokesman Alexander Ivanko as saying from Pristina.
He also explained that "the very serious security situation" in the northern Kosovo town was the reason behind UNMIK's decision to pull its police out of the region.
"We do have a substantial number of police officers there but they're under constant attack, and that's why the police commissioner decided to hand over the dealing of this situation, as we speak, to KFOR," Ivanko added.
The announcement was made after hundreds of Serbs clashed with international forces, who were conducting an operation to retake the UNMIK-controlled courthouse in Mitrovica.
Three days earlier, up to 300 local Serb protesters seized it by force.
Many of the protesters were said to be former court employees who lost their jobs after Kosovo came under UN administration following the end of the 1998-1999 conflict there.
As they seized the building, they ripped the UNMIK plaque from its facade and removed the UN flag, replacing it with that of Serbia.
UNMIK officials held talks with the protesters at the weekend in a bid to persuade them to leave the premises, but they refused.
Several hundred UN police officers and KFOR troops were reportedly involved in Monday's pre-dawn operation, launched after French peacekeepers blocked access roads to the court compound in Mitrovica's Serb-populated north.
Fifty-three Serbs were reportedly arrested in the courthouse, but about 20 are said to have escaped after rioters attacked a UN convoy.
Kosovo declared independence on February 17th.
Serb communities have so far refused to acknowledge the move, staging several challenges both to the UN and the Kosovo authorities – including, early in March, the takeover of a railway line by Serbian Railways.
"The situation is quite tense, but police and NATO are out in force," the AP quoted the spokesman for Kosovo Police Service (KPS) forces serving in the north, Besim Hoti, as saying.
The KPS is a local force established in 1999.
On Monday, hundreds of Serb protesters gathered outside the court building, throwing stones and firecrackers at members of the international forces participating in the raid.
They used tear gas and flare-grenades to disperse the crowds.
Three UN police officers and two KFOR soldiers were wounded in an explosion and were evacuated, according to a statement from the local Kosovo police force.
Hoti said he believed the blast, which occurred after UN police moved into the court premises, "was a hand grenade" activated in the compound's yard.
A later report by Reuters quoted a police official as saying that 13 Polish policemen had suffered non life-threatening injuries during the riots in Mitrovica.
Serbian sources say ten demonstrators were injured.
At least one UN vehicle and a KFOR truck are said to have been damaged after being set on fire during the clashes.
Over the weekend, the deputy chief of UNMIK, Larry Rossin, demanded an end to attempts at undermining UNMIK's authority.
Meeting with Serbian Minister for Kosovo Slobodan Samardzic on Sunday (March 16th), he noted a recent speech before the UN Security Council by Serbian Foreign Minister Vuk Jeremic, who said UNMIK was the exclusive administrative authority in Kosovo and that UN Resolution 1244 is the only legal framework that should be applied.
Serbia should immediately undertake steps to end attacks against UNMIK that "violate Serbia's promises given to the UN Security Council," Rossin said.
Macedonia with minority government until NATO summit
With less than a month to go before NATO meets in Bucharest, parliamentary parties have agreed to support Prime Minister Nikola Gruevski.
However, a new crisis broke out Monday as Democratic Party of Albanians members threatened a boycott.
By Zoran Nikolovski for Southeast European Times in Skopje – 17/03/08
Prime Minister Nikola Gruevski arrives for an urgent meeting with leaders of the major political parties in Skopje. [Getty Images]
Macedonia's main political parties agreed Saturday (March 15th) that Prime Minister Nikola Gruevski should run a minority government until the NATO summit in Bucharest is held beginning April 2nd.
But a new row erupted Monday as members of the Democratic Party of Albania (DPA) threatened a boycott of government institutions.
The DPA left the ruling coalition last week, saying Gruevski had refused the party's demands.
However, all of Macedonia's parliamentary parties -- including the DPA --agreed Saturday that the current administration should continue, given the critical situation Macedonia faces with regards to its NATO bid.
That bid is in jeopardy due to the ongoing name dispute with Greece, a member of the Alliance.
Athens has said it will use its veto power to prevent an invitation being given to Macedonia unless an acceptable formula is reached prior to the summit.
The Gruevski government faces another round of talks in Vienna this week, where UN special envoy Matthew Nimetz is meeting negotiators from both sides.
"We will function as a minority government for the next two or three weeks, with broad political support, and we are hopeful that such a relationship will be demonstrated in the parliament," Foreign Minister Antonio Milososki said Saturday.
Jani Makraduli, vice president of the largest opposition party -- the Social Democratic Union for Macedonia (SDSM) -- said that as a responsible party, SDSM would back the government until April.
The DPA broke with the ruling coalition last week because it did not gain support for some of its proposals, including for wider use of the Albanian language and flag, and more benefits for ethnic Albanian veterans of the 2001 conflict.
The DPA also wants Macedonia to recognise newly-independent Kosovo.
Despite its withdrawal, the party originally agreed to back the minority government.
On Monday, however, a key member, Deputy Prime Minister Imer Aliu, said the DPA could no longer work with Gruevski.
He said he would ask the party leadership to issue a statement calling on ethnic Albanians to withdraw from government institutions.
Aliu's comments were seemingly provoked by an interview Gruevski gave over the weekend, in which he suggested that the DPA was working on behalf of foreign interests.
Even with a DPA boycott, the Gruevski administration should still be able to function since it still has sufficient parliamentary support.
President Branko Crvenkovski, an SDSM member, said with only 20 days to go until the April summit, the talks with Greece are in their "most delicate phase".
He also signaled the window is open for a possible compromise.
"If a formulation with an additional term or an adjective -- which will not mean destruction of the national identity but rather an additional description of our state arrangement -- is found, I think we can achieve both countries' goals," the president said.
His comment appeared to deviate from Macedonia's previous stance, under which any modification of the country's name had been ruled out.
Prosecutor seeks to shut down Turkey's ruling party
The battle between Turkish secularists and the government of Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan has flared again, with chief prosecutor Abdurrahman Yalcinkaya demanding that the prime minister and 70 others be banned from politics.
By Ayhan Simsek for Southeast European Times-- 17/03/08
Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan. [Getty Images]
Turkey's chief prosecutor, Abdurrahman Yalcinkaya, has filed an indictment with the country's constitutional court, asking it to shut down the ruling party.
He charges that the Justice and Development Party (AKP) has become a "focal point" for activities that undermine secularism, and that the party has a "hidden agenda" aimed at transforming Turkey into an Islamist state.
The prosecutor demanded that 71 party members, including Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan, be banned from politics for five years.
Yalcinkaya's move is the latest round in a bitter battle between the AKP-led government and the country's secular forces, which include the army, judiciary and academia.
If the case goes forward, the vote of seven judges would be enough to close down the party.
Eight of the 11 judges on the bench were appointed by former President Ahmet Necdet Sezer, a staunch secularist.
The AKP describes itself as a conservative democratic party.
It won a solid victory in last year's elections, receiving 47% of the vote.
Last month, to the dismay of secularists, it succeeded in lifting a ban on wearing Islamic headscarves at universities.
In his 162-page indictment, Yalcinkaya said the removal of the ban was a key step sought by political Islamists. He also listed various statements by Erdogan that made reference to Islam and Islamic law.
These statements, the prosecutor said, revealed a planned strategy by the AKP to turn Turkey into a theocratic state.
Yalcinkaya also cited government efforts to ban the sale of alcohol in restaurants and bars owned by sports clubs.
Just after the indictment was filed, however, a minister in Erdogan's cabinet said the ban would be delayed for a year.
In an address Sunday, Erdogan declared his loyalty to secularism.
He also challenged the prosecutor's move, saying efforts to use the judiciary to disband the party were undemocratic.
Opinion in the Turkish media has been mixed.
Writing in Hurriyet, the country's leading daily, columnist Enis Berberoglu said the AKP government's policies since winning re-election have differed greatly from those in its first term.
When voters backed Erdogan at the polls, Berberoglu wrote, it was because they expected him to continue a sound economic policy and move forward with EU-inspired political reforms.
"If Tayyip Erdogan continued on the way that those votes directed, accelerated his steps on the way of Europe and global economy, he wouldn't face such a case," the columnist wrote, charging that the AKP is now more interested in debating whether teenagers should be required to study the Koran.
Another prominent writer, Milliyet's Hasan Cemal, strongly opposes the case. "The Constitutional Court should reject the demand for closure and should put an end to the process of making Turkey a graveyard for political parties.
It should ward off the possibility of political chaos."
At the weekend, the EU voiced concern over the new developments.
"In a normal European democracy, political issues are debated in parliament and decided through the ballot box, not in the courtroom," said Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn.
"The executive shouldn't meddle in the court's work, while the legal system shouldn't meddle in democratic politics."
Top aide killed in Greek security ministry bombing
The head of Greek Public Order Minister Michalis Chrysohoides's security detachment was killed Thursday evening as he tried to open a package for the minister, which proved to be a parcel bomb.
(AFP, DPA, The Guardian, Scotsman, ANA-MPA - 25/06/10; AP, AFP, Reuters, DPA, BBC, CNN, FT, Wall Street Journal, Telegraph, Deutsche Welle, ANA-MPA - 24/10/06)
A doctor enters the police headquarters and Ministry of Civil Protection in Athens after a bomb killed one person there Thursday (June 24th). [Getty Images]
A parcel bomb, disguised as a gift, exploded inside Greece's citizen's protection ministry on Thursday night (June 24th), killing a senior ministerial aide.
The blast occurred shortly after 8pm, several metres away from Public Order Minister Michalis Chrysohoides's office on the seventh floor of the heavily guarded building in Athens.
Police said the device went off when the minister's personal security chief, Giorgos Vassilakis, a 50-year-old police officer, tried to open what seemed to be a box of sweets.
"It was a wrapped package that exploded in the aide's hands after he apparently picked it up and tried to open it," police spokesman Thanassis Kokkalakis explained.
"We heard a big bang; there was a lot of smoke and damage."
Ministry officials were immediately evacuated and police sealed off the building.
Chrysohoides, who was not injured, said the package had been meant for him.
Visibly distressed and shaken by Vassilakis's death, he promised that those behind the attack will face justice.
"I lost a friend, a valuable associate and father of two children," Chrysohoides told reporters outside his ministry just minutes after the explosion.
"These cowardly murderers will be brought to justice," he added, stressing that such incidents will not deter police from efforts "to keep our citizens, neighbourhoods and cities safe".
There was no immediate claim of responsibility.
In remarks to the BBC, Greek terrorism expert Athanasios Drougas pointed at Revolutionary Struggle, the country's most violent militant group, which is on EU and US terrorist lists, as possibly being behind the bombing.
Police arrested the alleged ringleader and five other members of the organisation earlier this year.
Drougas believes the aim of Thursday's attack was to show that the group has not been defeated.
Condemning it as a "terrorist attack", Prime Minister George Papandreou expressed his condolences to Vassilakis's family, pledging that his government will not allow radical militants to achieve their goals or to terrorise Greeks.
"In a period when the country and our people are waging a daily struggle for the exit from the crisis, cowardly murderers want to deal a blow at normalcy and our democracy," he said in a statement late Thursday.
Authorities investigating the bombing are working to determine whether the bomb was delivered to the ministry by hand or by mail.
"King Otto's" reign comes to an end
His tenure as coach saw Greece earn its place on the map of international football.
Following the team's World Cup exit, however, the Rehhagel era is over.
By Panayiotis Koumantaros and HK Tzanis for Southeast European Times in Polokwane and Athens -- 25/06/10
Otto Rehhagel has been coaching Greece’s team for nine years. [Getty Images]
Greece put on a respectable show against Argentina, given that Diego Maradona's squad is among the favourites to win the 2010 World Cup.
But the team finally couldn't counter the damage from its 0-2 defeat by the Republic of Korea during the first group match -- a loss that made qualification for the second round a Herculean task, despite a subsequent win against Nigeria.
The loss to Argentina marked the end of an era, as coach Otto Rehhagel announced his long-expected departure from the team, which he has coached for the past nine years.
His legacy includes a Euro championship in 2004, qualification for the UEFA tournament in 2008, qualification for the World Cup in South Africa and, of course, the meteoric rise of the Greek team on FIFA's international standings.
Rehhagel chose not to fly back to Athens with the team so he could attend some of the second round matches.
Only time will tell if his departure was a mutual decision, or if "King Otto", as the local press often calls him, is bitter.
Noted Portuguese coach Fernando Santos is considered a likely candidate to succeed the 72-year-old Rehhagel.
Santos, 55, has coached three of Greece's most popular teams -- AEK Athens, Panathinaikos Athens and PAOK Thessaloniki -- after sitting on the bench of Portugal's "Big 3": Porto, Sporting and Benfica.
If predictions prove true, he is expected to implement a "youth movement" in a team whose most notable players are in their early to mid 30s.
Beyond the pitch, security problems that have plagued the World Cup in South Africa were plainly evident inside and outside the Peter Mokaba Stadium in the uplands city of Polokwane.
Groups of Greek fans were reportedly harassed on the way to the stadium, and the situation inside the venue was disorderly.
One of the World Cup's major sponsors -- a multinational beer brand -- was selling its product inside.
In terms of the actual play, Maradona's "pre-emptive" statements about possible rough play against his team's stars proved groundless, as nary an Argentine player suffered even the slightest injury.
Conversely, three top Greek players were substituted due to injuries suffered during the game.
Before defender Martin Demichelis' rebound shot into the Greek net in the 76th minute, the "miraculous" Messi was mostly kept at bay by young Genoa FC fullback Sokratis Papastathopoulos, whose solid performances at the 2010 World Cup may prove to be the ticket to an even bigger club.
The Greek press contingent stayed at the same hotel as the Argentine players and staff.
It proved to be a magnet for Argentine and local fans alike, many armed with the vuvuzela trumpets that have droned throughout the World Cup, and with drums and accordions, turning Polokwane into a small Buenos Aires.
Nevertheless, security was extremely tight, with no fans or the press able to gain access to players at the hotel.
Audio story: Destination Albania!
Has the time come for Albania to join its neighbours in Southeast Europe as a popular choice for vacationers from around the world?
Sami Neza takes a look at the prospects.
By Sami Neza for Southeast European Times in Tirana – 25/06/10
[Sami Neza/SETimes]
With an unspoiled coastline, clean water, medieval castles and Illyrian ruins, Albania has much to offer visitors, yet its potential as a holiday destination remains largely untapped.
The government is trying to change that through promotional campaigns and greater attention to tourism infrastructure.
The timing could not be more urgent, as Albania needs new sources of income to keep its economy going.
If the efforts succeed, there is hope that increased revenues from a burgeoning tourism sector will help offset the financial woes caused by the global recession.
Serbian parade cancellation could spark group bans
Belgrade's Gay Pride Parade -- scheduled for earlier this week -- was cancelled due to threats by extremist organisations.
By Bojana Milovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade --24/09/09
Police check the documents of a Serbian ultranationalist in Belgrade on Sunday (September 20th). [Getty Images]
Serbian authorities are considering banning political groups that threaten others, officials said on Monday (September 22nd).
The catalyst was threats by ultranationalist groups, which prompted the cancellation of Sunday's Gay Pride Parade in Belgrade.
Deputy Justice Minister Slobodan Homen told B92 that authorities plan to ask Serbia's top court to "ban all organisations that voice threats".
Ultranationalist groups Obraz (Honour) and the Serb Popular Movement 1389 opposed the gay march.
Obraz leader Mladen Obradovic warned that organisers would be responsible for what could happen if it took place as scheduled.
According to local press reports, a group of around 10,000 hooligans had planned to shower parade participants with stones hidden in drain shafts along the parade route.
The groups also planned to attack the Swedish Embassy, which was to host a reception for parade participants.
Certain members of these extremist groups even wanted to infiltrate the parade, which would allow them to later attack participants directly.
The interior ministry said police could not guarantee the parade participants' safety, and recommended that the parade move from central downtown to Usce Park, near the Danube and Sava rivers, where parade participants could be better protected.
"The interior ministry is obligated to bring attention to the high risk to property and human lives.
We proposed that a location be chosen which the police will be able to secure, so as not to be responsible for a single human life," said Interior Minister Ivica Dacic.
The organisers refused.
"The tradition in all major world towns is to hold such events on the main streets, in order to demonstrate that members of the gay and lesbian population are equal members of the society.
We do not want to walk around some meadow near the river; that would not be the Pride Parade," organisation committee member Majda Puaca said.
Suggesting the different venue indicated "the state has caved in to threats of violence," said organisers.
Serbian Police Chief Milorad Veljovic said on Monday that "stricter measures" would be taken against those who promote violent behavior, noting that 37 people were arrested Sunday after they tried to stage an anti-gay rally in central Belgrade.
Police also said no public rallies would be allowed in downtown Belgrade "in the future", due to security issues.
Anti-government protests continue in Hungary
Shunning protesters' calls for his resignation, Hungarian Prime Minister Ferenc Gyurcsany vowed to stay on Tuesday and continue painful reforms.
(AP, Reuters, FT, Bloomberg, BBC, CNN, Euronews, Budapest Business Journal - 20/09/06; AFP, BBC, Euronews, EUpolitix - 19/09/06)
Hungarian Prime Minister Ferenc Gyurcsany (centre) attends a parliament meeting in Budapest on Tuesday (19 September).
He has rejected calls to resign. [Getty Images]
Police and rioters clashed for the second consecutive night in Budapest on Tuesday (19 September) in Hungary's worst outburst of violence since the fall of communism in 1989.
The unrest erupted after a public radio station Sunday broadcast a leaked tape on which the prime minister told members of his Socialist Party that his government had been misleading people about the state of the national economy in order to win re-election in April.
"We screwed it up, big time," Gyurcsany was heard saying on the tape.
"No country in Europe has been so blatant.
We obviously lied throughout the past year and a half, two years.
And meanwhile, we didn't do a thing for four years … instead, we lied morning, noon and night."
On Monday, some 10,000 people gathered in a peaceful rally in front of parliament, calling for Gyurcsany's resignation.
The protest turned violent later that evening after hundreds of demonstrators stormed and looted part of the state television building.
According to Reuters, more than 150 people were injured.
New clashes between police and rioters then broke out on the streets of Budapest early Wednesday.
Nearly 100 arrests were made, and 60 people reportedly were injured.
Police used tear gas and water cannons to disperse the demonstrators.
On Tuesday, all five political parties represented in parliament, including the main centre-right opposition FIDESZ party, condemned the violence.
However, FIDESZ leader Viktor Orban expressed sympathy for the demonstrators and joined their calls for Gyurcsany's resignation.
With Hungary scheduled to hold municipal elections in less than two weeks, he said, the upcoming vote would represent a referendum about the tough economic reforms on the government's agenda.
"If the results of the 1 October vote show that Hungarian people reject the package, then the prime minister must go and take the package with him," Bloomberg news agency quoted Orban as saying at a press conference Tuesday.
"The outcry is justified, but it's not cars, policemen and the TV building that are responsible."
Gyurcsany, meanwhile, made it clear he was not planning to yield to public pressure and resign, pledging instead to continue with the needed, but unpopular, austerity measures.
In the fifth year of over-runs, Hungary's budget deficit is expected to exceed 10% of GDP this year, the highest in the EU, standing well above the 3% ceiling set for countries aspiring to join the Euro zone.
The government has raised taxes and lowered subsidies in a bid to reduce the record public deficit.
Additional planned measures are expected to lead to layoffs, as well as direct fees in the health sector and in higher education.
Draskovic: Serbia-Montenegro Must Co-operate With ICTY
Serbia-Montenegro Foreign Minister Vuk Draskovic has said his country must co-operate fully with the UN war crimes tribunal in order to join the EU and NATO.
(Reuters, AFP, Tanjug - 09/09/04; EUobserver - 08/09/04)
Serbia-Montenegro Foreign Minister Vuk Draskovic is urging Serbia to co-operate with the UN war crimes tribunal. [AFP]
Serbia-Montenegro will not gain admission to the EU and NATO unless it co-operates fully with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY), the country's foreign minister said Thursday (9 September).
During a visit to Italy, Vuk Draskovic named Euro-Atlantic integration as one of his country's top priorities.
"We have one very big obstacle that we must overcome if we want to join NATO and the EU.
I'm talking about co-operation with The Hague tribunal," Draskovic said.
He added that the economy would pick up if that obstacle were removed, paving the way for speedier progress towards EU membership.
Belgrade has been criticised repeatedly for failing to meet its international obligation to arrest and hand over to the ICTY suspects accused of war crimes during the Balkan conflicts of the 1990s.
Former Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic and some of his allies are already in the dock, but Belgrade has made no move to extradite other key suspects to The Hague, including four top Serb generals indicted last year over their roles in the 1998-1999 Kosovo conflict.
Wartime Bosnian Serb leaders Radovan Karadzic and Ratko Mladic are also still at large.
Emphasising that all suspects wanted by the ICTY must be sent to The Hague immediately, Draskovic said they had brought shame on his country and did not deserve to be shielded.
"There is no reason to protect them," the AFP quoted him as telling reporters in Rome on Thursday. "Our Serbian national obligation must be to build up some kind of Chinese wall between Serbs and followers of Milosevic.
Serbia-Montenegro belongs to Europe and Europe belongs to Serbia-Montenegro," he said.
Meanwhile, Serbian Finance Minister Mladjan Dinkic said the problem of Serbia's co-operation with the ICTY should be resolved by consensus.
"We have republican President (Boris) Tadic, we have Prime Minister (Vojislav) Kostunica, we of the G17 Plus are also in the government, and we must all stand behind a united decision," Serbia's Tanjug news agency quoted Dinkic as saying Wednesday in the southern Serbian town of Nis.
On Thursday, the ICTY's co-ordinator for Serbia-Montenegro rejected media reports suggesting a possible deal between the UN tribunal and Belgrade to allow the four Serb generals to be tried at home.
Given Belgrade's failure to co-operate with The Hague tribunal, it is "inappropriate" to discuss the issue at all, said Alexandra Milenov. "Politicians who still speak about the possibility of such a deal are misleading the public, and even worse, contributing to the mistaken belief that the tribunal is a political institution with which they can bargain," she added.
Culture and Sports: Bulgaria's Thracian treasures on tour
Gold and silver items from ancient Thrace will go in display in France, Switzerland and Japan.
Also in culture and sports: Croatia's Kostelic to miss World Cup season.
[Getty Images]
Ancient Thracian treasures discovered in Bulgaria will begin a tour abroad on October 14th, with successive exhibitions in France, Switzerland and Japan.
According to Deputy Culture Minister Ina Kileva, the exhibitions will include around 100 gold and silver antique items from the Rogozen, Borovo, Letnica and Panagyurishte treasures, as well as discoveries from recent years.
One of the world's best women skiers, Croatia's, Janica Kostelic, will skip the entire 2006-2007 World Cup season due to injuries.
The 24-year-old defending World Cup champion and quadruple Olympic champion says she needs a break due to back and knee problems.
Serbian tennis player Novak Djokovic won his second ATP trophy of the year, defeating Austria's Juergen Melzer 4-6, 6-3, 6-2 in the Open de Moselle finals in Metz, France.
Another Serbian player, Janko Tipsarevic, won the tournament in the Belgian town of Mons.
Tipsarevic defeated Britain's Alex Bogdanovic 6-4, 1-6, 6-2.
The 114th birthday of one of the Balkans' greatest writers, Nobel laureate Ivo Andric, was commemorated on Monday (October 9th) in his home town of Travnik, Bosnia and Herzegovina with literary discussions and a public reading from his works.
The event was organised by the Travnik Museum.
Hollywood actor John Cusack is expected to arrive this week in Bulgaria for the shooting of a new movie, "War Inc.".
Cusack will play an emotion-loaded hired killer in the film, which also features teen star Hilary Duff.
An exhibition highlighting Croatian-Slovenian cultural ties opened at the Josip Stipanov National Library in Zagreb.
The event, titled "Creators of Two Cultures", presents documents: manuscripts, magazines, books and maps dating back to the Middle Ages, demonstrating the long-time co-operation between the two neighbours.
It will be on display in Zagreb until November 4th, and then move to Ljubljana.
An exhibition featuring the young Macedonian painter Borjana Bozinovska opened at the Cedomir Krstic gallery in Pirot, Serbia.
Bozinovska's works, inspired by religious faith, are based on a technique close to iconography.
(Various sources – 04/10/06 - 11/10/06)
Footwear in flight at Serbia's parliament
One opposition lawmaker attracted a lot of attention with one gesture last week.
By Bojana Milovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 03/12/09
Serbian parliament member Gordana Pop-Lazic. [B92]
Parliament member Gordana Pop-Lazic of the Serbian Radical Party (SRS) threw a shoe at Deputy Speaker Gordana Comic on November 26th, to protest Comic's refusal to allow a fellow SRS member to finish a statement on a controversial statute.
"This is the shoe of the disgruntled citizens who voted for the Serbian Radical Party and who would do the same as me," Pop-Lazic told reporters after being forced to leave parliament with one shoe.
Pop-Lazic claimed her act was an expression against what she terms tyranny in parliament over opposition parties.
She also said that SRS leader Vojislav Seselj, who is on trial at The Hague tribunal, did not order this action.
Though Pop-Lazic missed the deputy speaker, she was fined 350 euros.
Radical Party Deputy President Dragan Todorovic backed Pop-Lazic's action, saying she would be "fined for not aiming well and failing to hit the deputy speaker".
Todorovic compared her to the Iraqi journalist who threw a shoe at former US President George Bush, and said, "Her shoe will enter history."
Serbian state TV missed the shoe incident and apologised to its viewers, saying the cameras were set on automatic mode at that time.
Some media, including the daily Danas, condemned the event, labeling it "a circus", while others such as Kurir reported the shoes were made in Italy and cost about 100 euros.
Opposition Democratic Party of Serbia (DSS) Whip Milos Aligrudic said Pop-Lazic's reaction was justified because of what he calls the deputy speaker's "scandalous way of running the sessions".
He explained that "if someone constantly provokes MPs by violating their rights, invents rules, maliciously breaches the rules of procedure [and] interrupts MPs, then that is really out of line."
However, the ruling coalition MPs expressed skepticism at those claims.
They point out the incident was a manner of scoring cheap political points and is a reflection of Pop-Lazic's upbringing.
The head of the ruling coalition caucus For a European Serbia, Nada Kolundzija, said that by throwing a shoe, Pop-Lazic "violated most severely" parliament's rules of procedure.
"There are very clear rules of procedure and they apply to everyone," she said.
"Their [the Radicals'] attempt to turn the parliament into a circus without any rules will fail and has failed so far," she added.
Romania's presidential runoff tainted by campaign tactics
The presidential election, which will head to a second round of voting this weekend, has seen some below the belt blows.
By Paul Ciocoiu for Southeast European Times in Bucharest -- 03/12/09
Election posters in Bucharest. [Getty Images]
Incumbent Traian Basescu and Social Democrat Mircea Geoana, former minister of foreign affairs, will face off Sunday (December 6th) in a presidential run-off.
The campaign turned ugly last week, after personal attacks were launched by the sparring camps.
A movie allegedly showing Basescu hitting a child at a rally in 2004 sparked controversy in the country.
The footage shows the president leaning over a stage, where he was addressing a crowd in the city of Ploiesti during the campaign for local elections five years ago, to listen to a woman who was asking for help.
A child approaches the two and, at a certain point during the conversation, Basescu seemingly hits the boy hard on the chin.
The president asked the National Institute for Criminal Expertise to analyse the footage, to determine whether it is authentic.
The institution released a communique saying its findings have been submitted to the presidency.
"The contested recording contains elements of computerised editing; it's not either authentic or a copy accurately made after an authentic recording," Basescu said, presenting the 18-page conclusion.
Basescu sued the newspaper that first published photos of the alleged incident, as well as Dinu Patriciu, a businessman who said he witnessed it.
In response to related attacks launched by former communist dissident and poet Mircea Dinescu, the president's wife, Maria Basescu, who has so far kept a low profile, released an open letter in which she rejected claims she had been hit by her husband.
"I'm breaking the silence today because what the media and the people behind it are saying nowadays is unacceptable to me."
The Pro Democratia Association (APD), a leading Romanian NGO promoting democracy, and which, among others, has monitored elections in Romania, condemned "the lack of ethics and professionalism which defines the electoral campaign for the Presidency".
"In this context, APD launches a last call towards normality and integrity to the electoral competitors who seem to have forgotten that the end doesn't always excuse the means," it further said.
"The electoral dirty attacks have reached an unprecedented peak.
The positive themes of the campaign have all been covered in the mud of such attacks," Florin Ciornei, a political editor with the Romanian newspaper Evenimentul Zilei told SETimes.
"These personal attacks are meant to induce emotional effects on the electorate -- demobilising the opponent's voters or attracting new ones who could to be outraged by such 'disclosures,'" he added.
According to an INSOMAR poll released on Tuesday, Geoana has 54% of the vote, compared to 46% for Basescu.
Diplomatic Diary: Regional countries discuss co-operation
BiH, Serbia, Croatia and Montenegro call for boosting ties, while Albania and Serbia seek to build on their relationship.
Serbian President Boris Tadic (right), Montenegrin President Filip Vujanovic (2nd from right), BiH Presidency Chairman Haris Silajdzic (2nd from left) and Croatian President Ivo Josipovic shake hands after a meeting in Sarajevo. [Getty Images]
Bosnia and Herzegovina Presidency Chairman Haris Silajdzic and the presidents of Serbia, Croatia and Montenegro -- Boris Tadic, Ivo Josipovic and Filip Vujanovic, respectively -- met in Sarajevo on Saturday (May 29th) for talks on EU membership.
The declaration signed at the end of the meeting called for mutual trust and regional co-operation.
Montenegrin President Filip Vujanovic said on Monday (May 31st) in Banja Luka that his country respects Bosnia and Herzegovina's sovereignty and territorial integrity.
After meeting with Republika Srpska (RS) President Rajko Kuzmanovic, Vujanovic also voiced Podgorica's support for BiH's bids to join the EU and NATO.
He added the three constituent ethnic groups should find ways to make the country more effective, in order to achieve these goals.
He also voiced hope that the two countries will conclude an agreement on double citizenship as soon as possible.
Albania and Serbia aim to build a strategic energy alliance, Energy and Economy Minister Dritan Prifti said on Monday (May 31st) after meeting with Serbian counterpart Petar Skundric in Tirana.
"Despite disagreements on some issues, there are opportunities where we can co-operate, especially on the economy," Prifti said, announcing a visit to Belgrade soon.
A meeting of representatives of ten countries with "divided cities" -- including Cyprus, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Iraq, Israel and Lebanon -- wrapped up on Friday (May 28th) in Serb-dominated northern Mitrovica.
Participants released a joint statement that called for rebuilding of trust between communities and elected authorities.
The gathering also resulted in pledges of concrete measures such as training and financial support.
Romanian President Traian Basescu, making an official visit to Skopje on Thursday (May 27th), voiced his unconditional support for Macedonia's NATO and EU aspirations.
At a joint press conference with Macedonian counterpart Gjorge Ivanov, Basescu said Romania supports a compromise in the name dispute with Greece.
Slovenian Prime Minister Borut Pahor and Serbian counterpart Mirko Cvetkovic agreed on Wednesday (May 26th) that bilateral relations are good and economic ties are progressing.
Pahor voiced Slovenia's support for Serbia's EU bid and added Ljubljana wants all countries in the region to wrap up their EU integration processes successfully.
Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan on Wednesday (May 26th) praised friendly new relations with Brazil, particularly the diplomatic co-operation between the two countries on Iran's nuclear programme.
In a statement at a business conference in Sao Paulo, Erdogan stressed that Turkey and Brazil, both non-permanent members of the UN Security Council, had the courage to address a source of deep concern in the international community.
(Various sources -- 25/05/10-01/06/10)
Culture and Sports: Rolling Stones rock Montenegro
Fans from the region cheered Mick Jagger and the Rolling Stones Monday night in Montenegro.
Also this week: the Black Sea Games ended in Turkey and Serbia's Jelena Jankovic was part of the winning mixed doubles team at Wimbledon.
Mick Jagger (left) performs with guitarist Keith Richards near the Adriatic town of Budva, Montenegro, on Monday (July 9th) as part of the Rolling Stones Big Bang tour. [Getty Images]
Around 55,000 fans from Montenegro, Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina and Italy attended the Rolling Stones concert Monday (July 9th) at Jaz Beach, near Budva.
The concert, part of the group's Big Bang tour, lasted two hours.
Croatian President Stipe Mesic, Serbian President Boris Tadic and Bulgarian President Georgi Parvanov were in attendance.
